2
0
2

0DEFENCE
STRATEGIC
UPDATE

© Commonwealth of Australia 2020

ISBN: 978-1-925890-26-6

This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the 

Copyright Act 1968 (Cwth), no part may be reproduced by any process 

without prior written permission from the Department of Defence.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE1

 ` Table of Contents 

Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Chapter One: Australia’s changing strategic environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Chapter Two: Defence policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Shape Australia’s strategic environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .25
Deter actions against Australia’s interests  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27
Respond with credible military force. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .29
Implications for force structure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30
Chapter Three: Capability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Capability priorities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34
Information and Cyber capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36
Maritime capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36
Air capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .38
Space capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .38
Land capabilities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .39
The Defence enterprise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40
Workforce  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .41
Information and communications technology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .41
Estate and infrastructure   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .42
Chapter Four: Industry and Innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45
Australian Industry Capability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46
Sovereign Industrial Capability Priorities   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46
Skilling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
Innovation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
Chapter Five: Resourcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
The Government’s Defence funding model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .53
How will Defence funding be spent?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .54
Alignment of strategy, capability and resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .55
Chapter Six: Reform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE3

 ` Foreword

The Government’s firm commitment to the Australian people remains that we 
will keep our nation safe and protect our way of life for future generations.

It is clear, however, that Australia’s strategic environment has deteriorated more 
rapidly than anticipated when we made this commitment in the 2016 Defence 
White Paper.  This deterioration means that adjustments should be made by the 
Government to our defence policy, capability and force structure.

This 2020 Defence Strategic Update sets out the challenges in Australia’s 
strategic environment and their implications for Defence planning.  

Our region is in the midst of the most consequential strategic realignment 
since the Second World War, and trends including military modernisation, 
technological disruption and the risk of state-on-state conflict are further 
complicating our nation’s strategic circumstances.  

The Indo-Pacific is at the centre of greater strategic competition, making the 
region more contested and apprehensive.  These trends are continuing and will 
potentially sharpen as a result of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic.  

As a result of the decisions taken by the Government in the 2016 Defence 
White Paper, substantial progress has been made in transforming the Australian 
Defence Force into a more capable, agile and potent force.  This has been 
underpinned by investment in Australia’s military capabilities and industries, 
a focus on strengthened international engagement, particularly with the 
United States, Japan, India, ASEAN and other allies and partners in our region, 
and successful implementation of the 2015 First Principles Review by the 
Department of Defence.

The Government has directed Defence to implement a new strategic policy 
framework that signals Australia’s ability – and willingness – to project military 
power and deter actions against us.  Under this new framework, Defence’s 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE4

strategic objectives are to deploy military power to shape Australia’s strategic 
environment, deter actions against our interests and, when required, respond 
with credible military force. 

These objectives require new military capabilities and demonstrated resolve.  
The Government will invest approximately $270 billion over the coming  
decade in new and upgraded Defence capabilities, including more potent  
and longer-range combat systems and more secure supply chains.  The 
Government will also continue deepening our alliance with the United States 
and strengthening our regional engagement across the Indo-Pacific, including 
through the Pacific Step-Up, and increase the Australian Defence Force’s ability 
to respond to natural disasters, including within Australia.

As a nation – and as an important regional leader in the global community – 
Australia is experiencing significant changes to our strategic environment.  The 
2020 Defence Strategic Update ensures Australia has the strategic defence 
policy to deal with these challenges.

The Hon Scott Morrison MP 
Prime Minister 

Senator the Hon Linda Reynolds CSC 
Minister for Defence

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE5

 ` Executive Summary

i 

ii 

iii 

iv 

v 

Australia is at the centre of a dynamic strategic environment.  In 
response, Australia’s defence policy must be agile and adaptive.  In line 
with the Government’s intent that defence strategy be subject to regular 
review, the Department of Defence commenced a Strategic Policy 
Review in 2019 to re-assess the strategic underpinnings of the 2016 
Defence White Paper.

While the drivers shaping the development of Australia’s future strategic 
environment identified in that white paper remain relevant, some have 
accelerated in ways that were not anticipated in 2016.

Military modernisation in the Indo-Pacific has accelerated faster 
than envisaged.  Regional force modernisation has resulted in the 
development and deployment of new weapons that challenge Australia’s 
military capability edge.  Expanding cyber capabilities – and the 
willingness of some countries and non-state actors to use them – are 
further complicating Australia’s strategic environment.

Confidence in the rules-based global order is being undermined by 
disruptions from a widening range of sources.  Major power competition 
has intensified and the prospect of high-intensity conflict in the  
Indo-Pacific, while still unlikely, is less remote than in the past.

The conduct of ‘grey-zone’ activities has also expanded in the Indo-Pacific.  
These activities involve military and non-military forms of assertiveness 
and coercion aimed at achieving strategic goals without provoking conflict.  
In the Indo-Pacific, these activities have ranged from militarisation of 
the South China Sea to active interference, disinformation campaigns 
and economic coercion.  Defence must be better prepared to respond to 
these activities, including by working more closely with other elements of 
Australia’s national power.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE6

vi 

vii 

viii 

ix 

This security environment is markedly different from the relatively more 
benign one of even four years ago, with greater potential for military 
miscalculation.  This could conceivably include state-on-state conflict 
that could engage the Australian Defence Force (ADF) where Australia’s 
interests are threatened.  Accordingly, Defence must be better prepared 
for the prospect of high-intensity conflict.

Although the long-term impacts of the coronavirus (COVID-19) 
pandemic are not yet clear, it has altered the economic trajectory of 
the region and the world with implications for Australia’s prosperity and 
security.  The trend towards a more competitive and contested region 
will not be fundamentally altered by the effects of the pandemic, but 
it is sharpening some aspects of strategic competition between the 
United States and China.  Some countries are using the situation to 
seek greater influence, while countries that were expected to become 
more prosperous and stable may experience economic hardship and 
instability.  The pandemic has also highlighted the importance of secure 
supply chains for Defence and defence industry, including sovereign 
industrial capability in some areas.

This 2020 Defence Strategic Update sets out the challenges in 
Australia’s strategic environment and their implications for defence 
planning.  It provides a new strategic policy framework to ensure 
Australia is able – and is understood as willing – to deploy military 
power to shape our environment, deter actions against our interests and, 
when required, respond with military force.

The Government has decided that under this new framework,  
defence planning will focus on our immediate region: ranging from the  
north-eastern Indian Ocean, through maritime and mainland South 
East Asia to Papua New Guinea and the South West Pacific.  This new 
framework will provide a tight focus for defence planning and alignment 
with broader initiatives such as the Pacific Step-up.  

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE7

x 

xi 

xii 

xiii 

xiv 

This will have implications for Defence capability and force structure.  It 
will mean adjustments to the plans set out in the 2016 Defence White 
Paper so that we are prepared for the challenges we are most likely 
to face.  These adjustments focus on ensuring the ADF can shape 
Australia’s strategic environment, deliver credible deterrence and 
respond to challenges to our interests.  More detail on the Government’s 
capability plans is set out in the 2020 Force Structure Plan.  

Defence will continue to strengthen its engagement with Australia’s 
international partners in support of shared regional security interests and 
will continue to deepen Australia’s alliance with the United States.

The Government’s plans for Defence capability are underpinned by 
its policies of developing a strong, sustainable and secure Australian 
defence industry and supporting leading edge national innovation.  The 
Government is committed to maximising opportunities for Australian 
industry, including in regional areas, in Defence projects.

The Government’s plans for future ADF capability are also underpinned 
by its ongoing commitment to providing funding certainty for Defence.  
This includes a commitment to a Defence Budget of $42.2 billion in 
2020-21 (including the Australian Signals Directorate).  The Defence 
Budget will grow over the next ten years to $73.7 billion in 2029-30 
with total funding over the decade of $575 billion.  This total includes 
approximately $270 billion of investment in Defence capability, compared 
with approximately $195 billion for the decade to 2025-26 when the 
2016 Defence White Paper was released.

Continuous transformational reform within Defence is essential to 
implement the strategy set out in this document and to build Defence’s 
capacity to respond to a more uncertain external environment.  Reform 
cannot be a one-off process – improvement is continual – and it must 
be purposeful.  Defence will continue to evolve and adapt to meet 
Australia’s changing strategic environment and maintain alignment of 
strategy, capability and resources.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATEIntentionally blank1

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE11

 ` Chapter One: Australia’s 

changing strategic environment

1.1 

1.2 

1.3 

The 2016 Defence White Paper set out six drivers that would shape 
Australia’s strategic environment: the roles of the United States and 
China; challenges to the stability of the rules-based global order; 
the enduring threat of terrorism; state fragility; the pace of military 
modernisation in our region; and the emergence of new, complex 
non-geographic threats.  These drivers will remain relevant over the 
next two decades.  However, several have accelerated since 2016, and 
in some cases their impacts are posing new challenges.  Additional 
factors that will shape Australia’s environment and impact defence 
planning have also emerged, in particular the economic and strategic 
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Strategic competition, primarily between the United States and China, 
will be the principal driver of strategic dynamics in our region.  This 
competition is playing out across the Indo-Pacific and increasingly in our 
immediate region: the area ranging from the north-eastern Indian Ocean 
through maritime and mainland South East Asia to Papua New Guinea 
and the South West Pacific.

Since 2016, major powers have become more assertive in advancing 
their strategic preferences and seeking to exert influence, including 
China’s active pursuit of greater influence in the Indo-Pacific.  Australia 
is concerned by the potential for actions, such as the establishment of 
military bases, which could undermine stability in the Indo-Pacific and 
our immediate region.  It is essential that countries pursue their interests 
in ways that are mutually respectful and supportive of stability, prosperity 
and security.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE12

1.4 

1.5 

1.6 

Some countries will continue to pursue their strategic interests through 
a combination of coercive activities, including espionage, interference 
and economic levers.  Tensions over territorial claims and the 
establishment of new military facilities are rising and are involving the 
use of military or para-military forces more frequently than in the past, 
including coercive para-military activities in the South China Sea.

Grey-zone activities are being adopted and integrated into statecraft 
and are being applied in ways that challenge sovereignty and habits 
of cooperation.  This includes challenges to the long established and 
mutually beneficial security partnerships Australia has with many 
countries, including in the Indo-Pacific.

Box 1 The grey zone

‘Grey zone’ is one of a range of terms used to describe activities 
designed to coerce countries in ways that seek to avoid military 
conflict.  Examples include using para-military forces, militarisation 
of disputed features, exploiting influence, interference operations and 
the coercive use of trade and economic levers.  These tactics are not 
new.  But they are now being used in our immediate region against 
shared interests in security and stability.  They are facilitated by 
technological developments including cyber warfare.

The rules, norms and institutions that help maintain peace and 
security and guide global cooperation are under strain.  Pressures on 
governance in the global commons, and in domains such as space and 
cyberspace, will open up potential sources of friction.  The thresholds 
for activities that could trigger a military response are unclear in space 
and cyberspace as they lack the more clearly defined boundaries of 
national borders and geography.  The undermining of norms or treaty 
arrangements will complicate efforts to manage these pressures as 
countries seek to impose systems that will support their own approach, 
while undermining the interests of other countries.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE13

1.7 

1.8 

1.9 

At the same time, many countries in the Indo-Pacific are accelerating 
their military modernisation, enabled by a long period of economic 
growth.  The rapid spread of technology will both support and challenge 
Defence’s requirement to maintain a regional capability edge in 
advanced warfighting and enabling capabilities.

Regional military modernisation includes the introduction of advanced 
strike, maritime surveillance and anti-access and area denial 
technologies, which have implications for Australian operations in the 
region.  New weapons being introduced into the region have increased 
range, speed, precision and lethality, placing Australian military forces 
at greater risk over longer distances.  North Korea’s missile and nuclear 
programs risk provoking significant shifts in the strategic system in 
North Asia.

Emerging and disruptive technologies will be rapidly translated 
into weapons systems – such as sophisticated sensors, autonomous 
systems and long-range and high-speed weapons – reducing decision 
times and improving weapon precision and lethality.  This will be 
facilitated by more highly educated, qualified and mobile workforces, 
the rapid dissemination of scientific knowledge via the internet as well 
as expanded commercial and research collaboration.  In some countries 
this will be further boosted by higher government priority and funding.  
Non-state actors such as terrorists have also demonstrated their ability 
to adapt new technologies for their purposes.

1.10  Expanding cyber capabilities and willingness by some countries 

and non-state actors to use cyber capabilities maliciously are further 
complicating Australia’s environment.  Cyber-attacks can directly 
compromise military capability and operations.  Cyber-enabled 
activities can also drive disinformation and destabilising interference 
in economies, political and social systems and infrastructure.  These 
activities are often conducted in ways designed to facilitate deniability 
and complicate attribution.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE14

1.11  The increasing connectivity of services and infrastructure to the internet 
will expose vulnerabilities in global supply chains, critical infrastructure 
and support services.  These will be key targets in grey-zone activities 
and as a precursor to conventional conflict.  The challenge of protecting 
critical technologies from intellectual property theft will become harder 
and will have major security as well as economic impacts.

1.12  Major power competition, coercion and military modernisation are 

increasing the potential for and consequences of miscalculation.  While 
still unlikely, the prospect of high-intensity military conflict in the 
Indo-Pacific is less remote than at the time of the 2016 Defence White 
Paper, including high-intensity military conflict between the United States 
and China.

1.13  Previous Defence planning has assumed a ten-year strategic warning 
time for a major conventional attack against Australia.  This is no longer 
an appropriate basis for defence planning.  Coercion, competition and 
grey-zone activities directly or indirectly targeting Australian interests 
are occurring now.  Growing regional military capabilities, and the speed 
at which they can be deployed, mean Australia can no longer rely on 
a timely warning ahead of conflict occurring.  Reduced warning times 
mean defence plans can no longer assume Australia will have time to 
gradually adjust military capability and preparedness in response to 
emerging challenges.  This includes the supply of specialised munitions 
and logistic requirements, such as fuel, critical to military capability.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE

15

Box 2 Strategic warning time

Strategic warning time for conventional conflict is the time a country 
estimates an adversary would need to launch a major attack against 
it, once the adversary’s intent to do so has been established.  This 
period is determined by indications of preparation and mobilisation of 
resources and capabilities.  New capabilities, including longer-range 
missiles, ballistic missiles and offensive cyber and space capabilities, 
have reduced strategic warning times.  It is also a less relevant 
concept for grey-zone activities, which can have little or no warning 
and occur below the threshold of armed conflict.

1.14 

1.15 

In this era of considerable change, the COVID-19 pandemic is creating 
even more uncertainty.  The precise long-term security implications of 
the pandemic are not yet clear, but its impact on regional growth, trade 
and societies will have lasting consequences.  The enormous economic 
impact of measures to contain the spread of the virus will set back 
development.  This economic shock could undermine political and social 
stability.  Far-reaching measures introduced in some countries to fight 
the pandemic could be used to reduce political freedoms.

It is unlikely that the pandemic will fundamentally alter either the 
longer-term shift in relative global economic and strategic weight to the 
Indo-Pacific or China’s more active pursuit of greater influence in the 
Indo-Pacific.  But it will have implications for how these trends develop.  
While collaboration and cooperation is expanding in response to the 
pandemic, some countries are using the situation to secure greater 
influence.  Strategic competition between the United States and China 
is unlikely to abate, and the pandemic has sharpened aspects of this 
competition.  Military modernisation could slow in some countries but 
will continue to be prioritised.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE

16

1.16  The pandemic has disrupted globalised supply chains, which over time 

have become a critical element of many of Australia’s national economic 
sectors and Defence capability planning.  A new focus on independent 
sovereign industrial capability has emerged.  In the first instance, this 
has manifested in a need to produce the equipment and supplies 
required for the health response to the pandemic.  Over the longer term, 
the pandemic has highlighted the potential vulnerability of global supply 
chains in providing critical defence supplies and equipment.

1.17  Threats to human security – such as pandemics, and growing water 

and food scarcity – are likely to result in greater political instability 
and friction within and between countries and reshape our security 
environment, including in the Indo-Pacific.  These threats will be 
compounded by population growth, urbanisation and extreme weather 
events in which climate change plays a part.  Within Australia, the 
intensity and frequency of disasters – such as the 2019-20 Black 
Summer bushfires – will test Australia’s resilience.  Disaster response 
and resilience measures demand a higher priority in defence planning.

1.18  State fragility, exacerbated by governance and economic challenges, 
has the potential to facilitate threats to the region including the spread 
of terrorism and activities that undermine stability and sovereignty.  
Increased state fragility could also potentially lead to the ADF being 
called on more often for evacuation, humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief missions and potentially more demanding stabilisation 
operations.  It may also increase threats to Australia’s domestic security 
including through irregular maritime arrivals.

1.19  While the actions of nation states, especially strategic competition, 
will be the principal driver of our strategic environment, the threat 
from terrorism and violent extremism will persist.  The emergence 
of new or renewed terrorist groups with territorial ambitions could 
engage international military forces, as in Iraq and the Philippines.  
Within Australia, terrorism presents an evolving challenge, including 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE17

the adoption by terrorists of new technologies and techniques requiring 
minimal preparation.

1.20  The trends set out above signal a security environment markedly 

different from the relatively more benign one of the past, with greater 
potential for military miscalculation, including state-on-state conflict that 
could engage the ADF.

1.21  The next chapter sets out the Government’s defence policy response to 

this environment. 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE18

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE19

2

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE21

 ` Chapter Two: Defence policy

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

The security environment described in the previous chapter requires a 
new strategy to sharpen defence planning.  This Strategic Update sets 
out the Government’s new strategic defence policy framework, which 
provides clearly identified geographical, operational and capability 
priorities.  This framework is intended to provide a tight focus for 
planning, and alignment with broader Government initiatives such as the 
Pacific Step-up and efforts to build a secure, prosperous and inclusive 
Indo-Pacific of independent, sovereign and resilient states.  Defence 
will continue to work closely with other Government departments and 
agencies to implement these broader initiatives.

The Government has decided that defence planning will focus on 
Australia’s immediate region: ranging from the north-eastern Indian 
Ocean, through maritime and mainland South East Asia to Papua New 
Guinea and the South West Pacific.

That immediate region is Australia’s area of most direct strategic 
interest.  Within it, Australia must be capable of building and exercising 
influence in support of shared regional security interests.  Access 
through it is critical for Australia’s security and trade.  Defence has 
long-established patterns of deployment and engagement in this region.  
Our defence relationships with countries in this region are an essential 
part of our security planning, including with the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN) member states, Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste 
and Pacific Island countries.

2.4 

Australia is a steadfast supporter of ASEAN’s central role in facilitating 
regional security dialogue and cooperation and plays an active role in 
the ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus to drive practical defence 
cooperation between regional countries.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE22

2.5 

2.6 

2.7 

The Pacific Step-up builds on Australia’s history of sustained 
engagement with countries in the Pacific and our shared and abiding 
interest in the promotion of sovereignty, stability, security and prosperity 
in the region.  In line with the Boe Declaration adopted by Pacific leaders 
at the 2018 Pacific Islands Forum, Australia is enhancing its security 
cooperation with Pacific countries, including through expanded ADF 
training activities, infrastructure development, maritime capability and 
people-to-people links.

But habits of cooperation in the Indo-Pacific are being challenged, 
leading to uncertainty and complicating security partnerships.  This is 
why Defence will continue to work to strengthen defence and diplomatic 
ties with the countries in Australia’s immediate region, working alongside 
important partners such as the United States, Japan and New Zealand.  
In some countries the economic and social impacts of COVID-19 may 
require an adjustment to planned activities, but we will work closely with 
partners to tailor our cooperation to meet evolving needs.

Australia’s immediate region is also the area in which we should be 
most capable of military cooperation with the United States.  Australia 
is a staunch and active ally of the United States, which continues to 
underwrite the security and stability of the Indo-Pacific.  We will continue 
working with the United States to build defence cooperation in the region 
to meet security challenges – such as the ongoing threat from terrorism 
– and to build common approaches to ensure stability in our region.  It 
also includes responding to natural disasters.  Should circumstances 
require it, this is also the region in which Australia needs to be capable 
of leading military operations.

2.8  While Australia’s immediate region will be the focus for defence 

planning, Defence will continue to invest in relationships, collaboration 
and partnerships across the Indo-Pacific and globally.  This is vital for 
the development of Defence capability, intelligence sharing (including 
through the Five Eyes arrangement) and cooperation in support of 
shared security interests.  

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE24

2.9 

Australia engages multilaterally, such as with the United Nations, and 
through bilateral partnerships such as our Special Strategic Partnership 
with Japan and our Comprehensive Strategic Partnership with India, 
to support shared interests in global rules and norms.  Australia also 
works with smaller groups of likeminded countries, such as the Trilateral 
Strategic Dialogue between Australia, Japan and the United States, to 
address common strategic issues.

2.10  Australia will continue to be an active and vocal advocate for a  

rules-based international order designed to support economic growth, 
security, prosperity and our values.  This includes support for laws and 
treaties, such as the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 
and international institutions that help constrain the exercise of coercive 
power and support collective responses to challenges such as terrorism 
and the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

2.11  Defence must also remain prepared to make military contributions 
outside of our immediate region where our interests are sufficiently 
engaged, including in support of US-led coalitions and counter 
terrorism actions such as in the Middle East.  Therefore, the ADF’s 
ability to deploy forces globally, where the Government chooses to do 
so, must be maintained.  This includes contributions across the wider 
Indo-Pacific, including in North Asia.  North Asia is a region of global 
strategic and economic significance and Australia has important trade 
and broader partnership-based interests with countries in the region.  
But any such wider contributions must be based on specific national 
interests.  Consideration of making wider military contributions should 
not be an equally-important determinant for force structure compared to 
ensuring we have credible capability to respond to any challenge in our 
immediate region.

2.12  The Government has set three new strategic objectives for defence 

planning.  These objectives replace the Strategic Defence Framework set 
out in the 2016 Defence White Paper.  The new objectives are: to shape 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE25

Australia’s strategic environment; to deter actions against Australia’s 
interests; and to respond with credible military force, when required.

2.13  These new objectives will guide all aspects of Defence’s planning 
including force structure planning, force generation, international 
engagement and operations.  To implement the new objectives, 
Defence will:

•  prioritise our immediate region (the north-eastern Indian Ocean, 
through maritime and mainland South East Asia to Papua New 
Guinea and the South West Pacific) for the ADF’s geographical focus;

•  grow the ADF’s self-reliance for delivering deterrent effects;

•  expand Defence’s capability to respond to grey-zone activities, 

working closely with other arms of Government; 

•  enhance the lethality of the ADF for the sorts of high-intensity 

operations that are the most likely and highest priority in relation to 
Australia’s security; 

•  maintain the ADF’s ability to deploy forces globally where the 

Government chooses to do so, including in the context of US-led 
coalitions; and

•  enhance Defence’s capacity to support civil authorities in response to 

natural disasters and crises.

Shape Australia’s strategic environment

2.14  Australia must be an active and assertive advocate for stability, security 
and sovereignty in our immediate region.  To support this objective, 
international engagement will continue to be a core Defence activity.  
Defence will continue to build new, and strengthen existing, partnerships 
that support this objective.  This includes continuing to build on the 
Government’s Pacific Step-up.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE26

2.15  Our partnerships with regional countries have a long history but will need 

to be continually developed to support shared interests in the context 
of our evolving strategic environment.  This will involve expanding our 
defence diplomacy, cooperation and capacity-building activities, including 
delivering security-related infrastructure.  This increased engagement 
will focus on the growing shared interest across the Indo-Pacific in 
strengthening sovereignty and resilience to coercion.  Defence will 
also expand its regional operational cooperation including in relation to 
humanitarian assistance and disaster relief and maritime security.

2.16  The capacity to conduct cooperative defence activities with countries 
in the region is fundamental to our ability to shape our strategic 
environment.  For defence planning, shaping Australia’s strategic 
environment includes preventing our operational access in the region 
from being constrained.  Constrained access would limit cooperative 
activities and the ADF’s ability to deploy military force in support of 
shared interests.  We must also be prepared to lead coalition operations 
where it is in the interests of the region for us to do so, especially in our 
immediate region.

2.17  The security arrangements, interoperability, intelligence sharing, and 

technological and industrial cooperation between Australia and the 
United States are critical to Australia’s national security.  We will continue 
to deepen the Alliance, including ensuring it reflects the priority our 
respective defence strategies accord the Indo-Pacific.

2.18  We will also continue to prioritise our engagement and defence 

relationships with partners whose active roles in the region will be vital 
to regional security and stability, including Japan, India and Indonesia.

2.19  We will also increase investment in capabilities that support the ADF’s 

awareness of our immediate region.  This includes expanding the Jindalee 
Operational Radar Network to provide wide area surveillance of Australia’s 
eastern approaches.  The Jindalee Operational Radar Network, based on 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE27

world-leading Australian technology, currently provides comprehensive 
surveillance of Australia’s northern and western approaches and is a vital 
component of Australia’s strategic surveillance network.

Deter actions against Australia’s interests

2.20  Australia has a highly effective, deployable and integrated military force.  

But maintaining what is a capable, but largely defensive, force in the 
medium to long term will not best equip the ADF to deter attacks against 
Australia or its interests in the challenging environment this document 
sets out.

2.21  The nature of current and future threats – including coercion in the 

region, more capable and active regional military forces, and expanding 
anti-access and area denial capabilities – requires Defence to develop 
a different set of capabilities.  These must be able to hold potential 
adversaries’ forces and infrastructure at risk from a greater distance, 
and therefore influence their calculus of costs involved in threatening 
Australian interests.

2.22  Only the nuclear and conventional capabilities of the United States 

can offer effective deterrence against the possibility of nuclear threats 
against Australia.  But it is the Government’s intent that Australia take 
greater responsibility for our own security.  It is therefore essential that 
the ADF grow its self-reliant ability to deliver deterrent effects.

2.23  Given Australia’s limited resource base, we must improve our ability to 
deliver these effects without seeking to match the capability of major 
powers.  This includes developing capabilities to hold adversary forces 
and infrastructure at risk further from Australia, such as longer-range 
strike weapons, cyber capabilities and area denial systems.

2.24  These capabilities will need to deliver deterrent effects against a broad 

range of threats, including preventing coercive or grey-zone activities 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE28

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE29

from escalating to conventional conflict.  The ADF’s presence and 
regional engagement must also serve to prevent actions that undermine 
regional resilience and sovereignty.

Respond with credible military force

2.25  The prospect of high-intensity conflict in the Indo-Pacific, while still 

unlikely, is now less remote.  The ADF must be better prepared for such 
conflict if deterrence measures fail, or to support the United States and 
other partners where Australia’s national interests are engaged.

2.26  This means it is vital that we continue to enhance the lethality and 

readiness of the ADF, as well as the logistic support required for 
high-intensity warfighting.  In the event of a high-intensity conflict that 
engages the ADF, we need to have depth for sustaining key capabilities 
and materiel, especially munitions.  This will require less risk-averse 
engagement with industry to accelerate capability development and 
strengthen supply, as well as selectively increasing interdependence 
with the United States and other partners in more responsive and 
assured global supply chains. 

2.27  Defence will also need to enhance its support to civil authorities in 

response to national and regional crises and natural disasters, such 
as pandemics, bushfires, floods or cyclones.  This includes detailed 
planning for the provision of logistic and other support for civil authorities 
during and after a disaster.  The Government has directed further 
development of Defence capability in this area, including in relation 
to equipment, facilities, training, logistics and planning.  It also means 
strengthening partnerships with civil authorities in Australia to support 
national efforts against shared challenges, including closer relationships 
with other Commonwealth as well as state and territory authorities.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE30

Implications for force structure 

2.28  The 2016 Defence White Paper judged that Australia required a force 

structure and military capability able to undertake a broad range of 
tasks.  Objectives for this force covered Australia and its approaches, our 
nearer region, the broader Indo-Pacific and global order.  The objectives 
were equally weighted for force structure and force posture  
decision-making.

2.29  The 2016 Defence White Paper maintained broad continuity with past 
defence planning, based on a strategy designed to respond to a wide 
range of regional and global challenges.  Our relatively more benign past 
security environment provided the strategic space for this strategy.

2.30  Our environment is now more complex, with Australian interests being 

more directly challenged than in the past, and sharper prioritisation 
is required.  Although the security implications of the COVID-19 
pandemic are unclear, they are unlikely to improve the long-term trends 
in Australia’s environment, such as increasing strategic competition, 
or decrease the importance of building a more potent ADF.  Defence 
must be able to deploy military power to shape our environment, 
deter actions against our interests and, when required, respond with 
military force.  The new policy will require force structure and capability 
adjustments focussing on responding to grey-zone challenges, the 
possibility of high-intensity conflict and domestic crises.

2.31  More detail on the Government’s plans to strengthen Defence 

capabilities to deliver its strategic policy is set out in the next chapter.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE3

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE32

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE33

 ` Chapter Three: Capability

3.1 

3.2 

As a result of the decisions the Government made in the 2016 Defence 
White Paper, Defence has made substantial progress in building a more 
potent, capable and agile ADF.  Defence is regenerating and expanding 
its maritime capabilities, delivering a fifth-generation air force and 
enhancing the mobility and security of its land forces.  Defence is also 
implementing upgrades and enhancements to critical enabling functions 
that support its warfighting capabilities.

However, the Government has decided that adjustments to the 2016 
Defence White Paper plans are required.  These adjustments focus on 
ensuring the ADF can shape Australia’s strategic environment, deliver 
credible deterrence and respond to challenges to our interests.  The 
Government’s strategy includes continuing to strengthen the intelligence 
and cyber capabilities of the Australian Signals Directorate, which 
are critical for identifying and responding to foreign threats targeting 
Australian interests.

3.3 

The Government’s plans include:

•  capabilities to support an enhanced Defence posture and  

whole-of-government efforts to build Australia’s partnerships and 
influence in the region, including the Pacific Step-up objectives; 

•  more potent capabilities to hold adversary forces and infrastructure 
at risk further from Australia, including longer-range strike weapons, 
cyber capabilities and area denial systems; 

•  more durable supply chain arrangements and strengthened 

sovereign industrial capabilities to enhance the ADF’s self-reliance, 
including in the context of high-intensity operations; 

• 

increased investment in capabilities to respond to grey-zone 
activities, including improved situational awareness, cyber 
capabilities, electronic warfare and information operations; and

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE34

•  measures to enhance ADF support to civil authorities in response to 
national crises and natural disasters, such as pandemics, bushfires, 
floods or cyclones. 

Capability priorities

3.4 

3.5 

3.6 

As is longstanding practice, Defence regularly reviews its capability plans 
to ensure they can deliver the Government’s strategy.  Under the 2020 
Force Structure Plan, a comprehensive assessment of the ADF’s force 
structure and current and future Defence capability investments has 
been conducted.  This assessment focussed on meeting the strategic 
guidance set out in this document, responding to new technologies and 
supporting ongoing modernisation of Defence over a 20 year timeframe.

The Government has directed that Defence implement the 2020 Force 
Structure Plan.  To deliver the Government’s defence strategy, including 
the capabilities set out in this chapter and the 2020 Force Structure Plan, 
the Government will provide Defence, including the Australian Signals 
Directorate, with total funding over the decade to 2029-30 of $575 billion, 
including approximately $270 billion of investment in Defence capability.  
Further details of the Defence funding model are set out in Chapter Five.

The development of the 2020 Force Structure Plan was based on 
extensive experimentation and analysis, underpinned by cost modelling.  
This included assessing the ADF’s ability and capacity in relation to a 
range of possible scenarios, including responding to natural disasters, 
and managing a number of concurrent tasks.  

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE35

3.7 

This investment plan will strengthen Defence capability across five 
domains: Information and Cyber; Maritime; Air; Space; and Land.  The 
Government has also allocated funding for measures to enhance resilience 
and supply chain security and initiatives to enhance Defence’s workforce, 
enterprise information and communications technology and infrastructure 
and estate.  These capabilities are essential for strengthening the ADF’s 
ability to deploy and operate as an integrated joint force.

Chart 1 – Proportional Capability Investment for the  
Decade 2020-2030

3%

28%

24%

6%

2%

11%

20%

6%

  Air Domain
  Other Enterprise and 
  Enabler Programs
  Enterprise Information 
  Communication Technology 
  Enterprise Infrastructure 
  and Estate 
  Information and Cyber Domain
  Land Domain
  Maritime Domain
  Space Domain

Note:  these percentages are rounded numbers and may not equate exactly to the capability 
domain investment figures.

3.8 

Key investments in each of these areas are set out below, with further 
detail outlined in the 2020 Force Structure Plan.  The capabilities outlined 
in this plan will provide the Government with a flexible range of options to 
shape Australia’s strategic environment, deter actions against Australia’s 
interests and respond with credible military force.  Increasing integration 
across Defence will continue to be critical to deliver these options, with 
individual capabilities contributing to different options in different ways.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE36

Information and Cyber capabilities

3.9 

Information underpins all effective military operations.  Secure and 
resilient information systems are critical to delivering capability, 
conducting operations, sharing information with partners and 
communicating with other government agencies.  This includes measures 
to ensure that critical information and communications infrastructure, 
systems and networks are defended against cyber attacks.  

3.10 

Investments are planned in joint command, control and communications 
systems, joint electronic warfare and defensive cyberspace operations.  
This investment in systems will be complemented by the establishment 
of a new counter-intelligence capability, including infrastructure and 
training equipment.

3.11  Defence will also invest in offensive cyber and operational cyberspace 
capabilities for deployed forces, as well as systems to integrate 
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance programs and data.  
Intelligence capability will be further bolstered by continued investment 
in signals intelligence and the expansion and upgrading of secure 
communication systems.  

3.12  This investment in strengthened Information and Cyber domain 

capabilities will total around $15 billion over the next decade.

Maritime capabilities

3.13  Australia’s naval and maritime forces are a vital element of our defence 

strategy.  They must be able to project force at long range from Australia, 
operate across vast distances and work closely with civil maritime 
security agencies to protect our borders.  The 2016 Defence White 
Paper laid the foundation for the largest recapitalisation of the Royal 
Australian Navy in modern history, underpinned by a continuous National 
Naval Shipbuilding Enterprise.  This includes the acquisition of 12 Attack 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE37

Class Submarines, nine Hunter Class Frigates and 12 Arafura Class 
Offshore Patrol Vessels.  

3.14  The Government will continue to deliver this nationally significant program 

of investment in ships and submarines, modern shipyard infrastructure 
and the associated vital workforce growth and skilling initiatives.  
Additional investments will be made in anti-submarine warfare, sealift, 
border security operations, maritime patrol and reconnaissance, air 
warfare, sea control and undersea warfare capabilities.  The Government 
will also prioritise the acquisition of strike weapons to increase the ADF’s 
maritime deterrence and long-range land strike capabilities.  

3.15  Significant planned investments will extend Navy’s ability to project 

and sustain joint operations, including in responding to disasters.  This 
includes two multi-role sealift and replenishment vessels, life extension 
of Australian Defence Vessel Ocean Protector and its subsequent 
replacement with an ice-rated vessel capable of operating in the 
Southern Ocean.  The Government is also planning the acquisition of a 
vessel built in Australia to support the Pacific Step-up.  The Government 
will also invest in area denial systems including an enhanced mine 
warfare capability to secure Australia’s maritime approaches.  Navy’s 
mine countermeasures and tactical hydrographic capabilities will be 
enhanced through the acquisition of up to eight additional vessels, 
built in Australia, potentially based on the Arafura Class Offshore Patrol 
Vessel design.

3.16  The Government’s strengthening of the ADF’s maritime capabilities will 
involve investment of around $75 billion over the next decade.  Further 
detail on the critical role of Australia’s shipbuilding industry in delivering 
this plan will be included in an update to the Government’s Naval 
Shipbuilding Plan at the end of 2020.  

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE38

Air capabilities

3.17  Australia requires a technologically advanced strike and air combat 

capability which must be capable of defeating threats as far from 
Australia or its deployed forces as possible.  As well as possessing 
potent weapons, our air combat capabilities must be fully integrated 
with supporting intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance and logistics 
systems.  Investment will be made in Australia’s air combat capability, 
comprising the F-35A Lightning II Joint Strike Fighters and EA-18G 
Growler Electronic Attack aircraft, to ensure they remain capable of 
delivering lethal and potent effects.  Defence will also acquire additional 
advanced air defence and longer-range strike weapons.  

3.18  The Government’s plans also include the acquisition of remotely 
operated and/or autonomous air vehicles and the development of 
advanced air-to-air and strike capabilities with improved range, speed 
and survivability, potentially including hypersonic weapons.  The 
survivability of our deployed forces will also be improved through new 
investments in an enhanced integrated air and missile defence system 
and very high-speed and ballistic missile defence capabilities for 
deployed forces.

3.19  The Government will also enhance Defence’s intelligence, surveillance 
and reconnaissance capabilities.  This includes expanding the Jindalee 
Operational Radar Network to provide wide area surveillance of 
Australia’s eastern approaches.

3.20  To deliver these strengthened air capabilities the Government will invest 

around $65 billion over the next decade.

Space capabilities

3.21  Assured access to space is critical to ADF warfighting effectiveness, 
situational awareness and the delivery of real-time communications 
and information.  

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE39

3.22  The Government will significantly increase investment in Defence’s 
space capabilities.  This includes plans for a network of satellites to 
provide an independent and sovereign communications network and 
an enhanced space control program.  The Government will continue 
investment in space situational awareness, including sensors and 
tracking systems.  

3.23  Defence will work closely with industry and other government agencies 
to advance its space capabilities, including through the Australian 
Space Agency.

3.24  The Government has agreed to invest around $7 billion in space 

capabilities over the next decade.

Land capabilities

3.25  The land force must be connected, protected, lethal and enabled.  

Enhanced mobility, firepower, protection and situational awareness will 
allow land forces to rapidly deploy, achieve their missions and return 
home safely.  

3.26  To enable this, investments will be made in enhancing the protection, 
weaponry and communication systems of the land force.  Long-range 
lethality will be strengthened through additional long-range rocket 
systems, protected mobile artillery and enhanced missile development.

3.27  Regional force projection and lift capabilities will be enhanced with new 

large landing craft, special operations vehicles, watercraft and long-
range helicopters.  

3.28  The Government will strengthen the ADF’s land capabilities with 
investment of around $55 billion over the next decade.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE40

The Defence enterprise

3.29  A Defence enterprise that is resilient to shocks and outside interference 
is critical to the Government’s defence strategy.  The ADF must increase 
its self-reliant ability to deploy and deliver combat power and reduce 
its dependencies on partners for critical capability.  The ADF must 
also be more capable of working with Commonwealth and state and 
territory agencies, including to respond to disasters within Australia.  
The Government will enhance Defence’s resilience through a range of 
investments and sustainment funding in the Defence enterprise.  

3.30  To further build resilience and self-reliance, Defence will increase the 

range and quantity of the weapon stocks it holds.  Funding has also 
been allocated for exploring and potentially implementing additional 
measures, including the development of sovereign manufacturing 
capabilities for advanced guided weapons and explosive ordnance and 
expanding ADF fuel storage capacity.

3.31 

Increased sustainment funding will increase the ADF’s preparedness to 
provide faster responses, longer duration assistance and more flexibility 
to Government in support of operations in Australia or overseas.  The 
ADF’s preparedness will also be increased through enhancements to 
Defence training areas and facilities both live and simulated.

3.32  The Government will also continue to build Australia’s self-reliant 
geospatial-information and intelligence capability, both to support 
strategic intelligence requirements and support precision guided 
weapons.  This will include acquisition of a sovereign space-based 
imagery capability to enhance coverage of the Indo-Pacific region. 

3.33  Upgrades to Defence’s core enterprise management systems will be 

driven by a business enterprise architecture and transformation program, 
which will include improvements to Defence’s human resource, health, 
resource planning and enterprise information management systems.

3.34  This capability investment in the Defence enterprise will be around  

$15 billion over the next decade.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE41

Workforce

3.35  The Government has determined that the ADF and Defence’s 

Australian Public Service workforce must grow beyond the plans in 
the 2016 Defence White Paper.  The requirement is based on detailed 
analysis of a range of scenarios, from humanitarian assistance and 
disaster relief operations to combat.  Additional growth is also planned 
for cyber operations within the Australian Signals Directorate.  

3.36 

In the short term out to 2024, the Navy, Army and Air Force will all 
grow their workforce.  In particular, the Navy workforce must expand to 
support the introduction of new naval capabilities. This larger workforce 
will support increasing maritime commitments in the region, including an 
increased presence in the Pacific and enhanced border security.  

3.37  The Government has directed Defence to develop further plans for 

subsequent workforce growth over the medium to long term for 
consideration by Government in 2021.  This growth will be critical to 
deliver the enhanced capabilities set out in this document.  Continual 
reform will be essential to recruiting, developing and supporting our 
workforce to ensure that Defence has the people it needs into the 
future.  This is particularly important in growing and highly competitive 
fields including shipbuilding, cyber security and information and 
communications technology.  

Information and communications technology

3.38  Defence has undertaken significant investment in its critical enabling 
information and communications technology, including provision 
of a secure Defence terrestrial communications network and the 
modernisation of desktop computing and infrastructure. 

3.39  Over the next five years, Defence will need to plan for developments 

including next generation secure wireless networks, artificial intelligence 
and augmented analytics.  The technology changes with implications 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE42

for Defence projected over the following six to ten years will also likely 
include robotics, immersive technologies and quantum computing. 

3.40  Defence will continue to focus investments on ensuring it is able to seize 
the opportunities and meet the challenges posed by such developments.  
In particular, investments aligned to security, information access and 
management, connectivity, and processing and storage are planned.  They 
include upgrades to secure networks and to systems that support sharing 
information with domestic and international partners.  In addition to its 
investments, Defence will continue to deliver enterprise-wide information 
and communications technology business transformation projects. 

3.41  The Government has committed investment of around $5 billion in 

Defence information and communications technology capability over the 
next decade.

Estate and infrastructure 

3.42 

Infrastructure such as bases, ports, airfields, training areas and logistics 
facilities underpin the ADF’s ability to prepare for, conduct and sustain 
military operations including in response to disasters.  The Government 
has committed to strengthening the Defence estate and infrastructure 
with investment of around $30 billion over the next decade.

3.43  The Government will continue to invest in new and enhanced facilities 

to support and sustain the ADF.  Key planned investments include 
a new Army watercraft base in Northern Australia, upgrades to key 
maritime ports to support Navy’s operations, upgrades or new facilities 
to support the expanded submarine fleet and provisions for significant 
enhancements for Australia’s airbases.

43

4

44

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE45

 ` Chapter Four: Industry and 

Innovation

4.1 

The Government remains committed to developing a strong, sustainable 
and secure Australian defence industry and supporting leading edge 
national innovation.  Both are vital to the ADF’s ability to act with greater 
independence in an increasingly contested strategic environment.  

Industry

4.2 

4.3 

A robust, resilient and internationally competitive defence industrial base 
is a fundamental input to Defence capability.  Continuing the cultural 
shift to a genuine partnership between Defence and industry is critical to 
ensuring the expertise resident in our industrial base effectively supports 
Australia’s national security.  This means making it easier for industry 
to work with Defence to access opportunities in the defence sector, 
including in major capability and infrastructure programs.  Defence must 
also help industry equip itself with the skilled workforce it will require to 
support the ADF and connect industry to opportunities in international 
markets. 

The positive and effective relationship between Defence and industry has 
been demonstrated in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.  Defence 
has worked closely with industry to ensure continuity of support to 
critical national security capabilities despite the pressures and impact 
of the pandemic.  The Australian Government has also implemented 
significant initiatives to support defence industry through the pandemic, 
and Defence will continue to contribute to strengthening and growing the 
Australian economy as it recovers from this crisis.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE46

Australian Industry Capability 

4.4 

4.5 

4.6 

The Australian Industry Capability Program supports Australian industry 
involvement in Defence procurement and projects.  The program requires 
that prime companies competing for Defence contracts demonstrate how 
they will maximise Australian industry involvement.  Examples include the 
acquisition contract for Boxer Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles involving 
an Australian Industry Capability commitment of $1.3 billion and the 
more than 300 Australian companies that are currently associated with 
the construction of the Offshore Patrol Vessels. 

Australia’s defence industry is growing with over 4,000 businesses 
employing approximately 30,000 staff.  An additional 11,000 Australian 
companies directly benefit from Defence investment and, when further 
downstream suppliers are included, the benefits flow to approximately 
70,000 workers in total.

The Government is committed to maximising opportunities for Australian 
industry, including in regional areas, to participate in Defence projects.  
Defence is establishing an independent audit program to ensure that 
prime contractors deliver on their contracted obligations to support 
Australian industry and that commitments to Australian businesses are 
honoured.  Defence will use contractual and non-contractual means to 
ensure that prime contractors meet the Government’s expectation that 
they maximise Australian industry involvement. 

Sovereign Industrial Capability Priorities 

4.7 

The Government has identified an initial ten Sovereign Industrial 
Capability Priorities, set out in the 2018 Defence Industrial Capability 
Plan.  They are the industrial capabilities that are critical to Defence and 
must be developed or supported by Australian industry.  This means 
Australia must have access to, or control over the skills, technology, 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE

47

intellectual property, financial resources or infrastructure that underpin 
the Priorities.  The Priorities represent a subset of the industrial 
capabilities that Defence relies on to deliver its core objectives and will 
be managed closely across Defence and industry planning. 

4.8 

By the end of 2020, implementation plans will be available for each 
of the Priorities.  The plans will further clarify the specific industrial 
capabilities that Defence needs now and into the future.  These plans 
will give industry the confidence to invest in the equipment, people and 
technologies needed to develop and deliver these industrial capabilities.

Skilling

4.9 

Science, technology, engineering and maths skills will underpin the 
industries and jobs of the future, including in the defence sector.  The 
Schools Pathways Program, the Defence Industry Internship Program 
and a new Skilling Australia’s Defence Industry program will continue 
to equip the defence sector with the skilled workforce it will require to 
support and sustain the ADF.  The Naval Shipbuilding College is also 
working closely with industry and education and training stakeholders to 
understand demand and supply requirements of the naval shipbuilding 
industry throughout all phases of build and sustainment. 

Innovation

4.10  The Government will continue to invest in innovation through a 

structured approach to deliver a comprehensive, cohesive and agile 
innovation system that will bridge the gap between technology 
development, acquisition and delivery into service.

4.11  Effectively shaping and harnessing the national science and technology 
enterprise is required to achieve a cohesive and agile innovation system 
that can deliver defence priorities.  Defence, through the Defence 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE

48

Science and Technology Group, will play a stronger role in enabling, 
coordinating and focusing support to Defence from the national science 
and technology enterprise including universities, other publicly funded 
research agencies and industry.  

4.12  This more focussed science and technology effort is set out in the More 
Together: Defence Science and Technology Strategy 2030.  The strategy 
provides guidance to ensure the national science and technology 
enterprise is strengthened and leveraged to address the strategic 
challenges Australia faces.  It includes initiatives to direct resources to 
Defence’s most critical challenges and supports a more streamlined 
transition of promising technological concepts into capability.

4.13  The future Defence innovation system includes continued funding for 

the Next Generation Technologies Fund and the Defence Innovation 
Hub.  This will enable investment in potentially high payoff research and 
in relatively lower-risk incremental innovation developed from industry 
technology.  This investment reinforces Defence’s commitment to 
stability and continued growth in the innovation sector.

4.14  To ensure Defence’s innovation system has the capacity to meet 

the demands of future technological development, a new Capability 
Acceleration Fund will be introduced from the middle of this decade.  
This fund is planned to support the development of key disruptive 
technologies with industry beyond the early-stage research and 
demonstration stages, taking promising future technologies all the way 
through to acquisition.  

4.15  The Government has committed around $3 billion of capability 

investment in Defence innovation, science and technology over the next 
decade.

4.16  Effectively leveraging Australia’s defence industry and innovation 

capabilities will depend on ongoing reform of the Defence organisation, 
as set out in Chapter Six.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE49

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATEIntentionally blank51

5

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE52

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE53

 ` Chapter Five: Resourcing

5.1 

5.2 

The Government is providing long-term funding certainty for Defence 
so it can deliver the strategy set out in this document.  To provide this 
certainty, the Government is continuing its policy of providing a 10-year 
funding model for Defence, first articulated in the 2016 Defence White 
Paper.  This funding model will provide Defence, including the Australian 
Signals Directorate, with total funding of $575 billion to 2029-30.

Defence needs this certainty so it can plan over the long term, including 
for complex capability acquisition programs that can span decades.  
Australian defence industry also requires certainty to underpin its 
investments in the skills and technology that Defence relies on to deliver 
and support its capabilities.

The Government’s Defence funding model

5.3 

5.4 

The Government is on track to meet its commitment to growing the 
Defence budget to two per cent of Australia’s Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) in 2020-21, providing $42.2 billion of funding to Defence 
(including the Australian Signals Directorate) in 2020-21.  

This funding will grow over the next ten years to $73.7 billion by 
2029-30.  The total funding of $575 billion over the decade includes 
around $270 billion in capability investment, compared to $195 billion 
in capability investment for the decade to 2025-26 when the 2016 
Defence White Paper was released.  The Defence Budget has been 
decoupled from GDP forecasts to avoid the need for adjusting Defence’s 
plans in response to future fluctuations in GDP.  

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE54

Table 1 Total Defence Funding Profile 2020-21 to 2029-30 
(Including the Australian Signals Directorate)

2020-21 
$m

2021-22 
$m

2022-23 
$m

2023-24 
$m

2024-25 
$m

2025-26 
$m

2026-27 
$m

2027-28 
$m

2028-29 
$m

2029-30 
$m

Total 
Decade 
2020-21 
 to  
2029-30 
$m

Defence Funding 
(including ASD)1

42,151

46,037

50,170

53,318

55,567

58,175

61,239

64,639

69,986

73,687

574,969

NOTE:
1. Defence Funding (including ASD) is as at the MYEFO 2019-20 price basis. This price basis will be regularly adjusted in line with  
Commonwealth Budget processes.

How will Defence funding be spent? 

5.5 

5.6 

5.7 

The Defence budget, not including its funding for operations, comprises 
three major categories of costs: acquisition of new capability; 
sustainment of capability; and workforce.  A fourth category, the 
operating budget, is comparatively minor.  Details of the three key 
categories of funding are outlined below.

Over the decade to 2029-30, investment in the acquisition of new 
capability will grow from $14.4 billion (34 per cent of the budget) to 
$29.2 billion (40 per cent of the budget).  

Over the decade to 2029-30, investment in sustainment of current and 
future capability will grow from $12.6 billion (30 per cent of the budget) 
to $23.8 billion (32 per cent of the budget).  

5.8  Over the decade to 2029-30, investment in the Defence workforce will 

grow from $13.5 billion (32 per cent of the budget) to $19.2 billion 
(26 per cent of the budget).  

5.9 

The breakdown of the categories of Defence funding, including the 
Australian Signals Directorate, is illustrated in the chart below.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE55

Chart 2 –Total Defence Funding Model by Category (including the 
Australian Signals Directorate)

80,000

70,000

60,000

50,000

m
$

40,000

30,000

20,000

10,000

-

2020–21

2021–22

2022–23

2023–24

2024–25

2025–26

2026–27

2027–28

2028–29

2029–30

WORKFORCE 

SUSTAINMENT 

ACQUISITION 

OPERATING 

Alignment of strategy, capability and resources 

5.10  The strategy and resourcing set out in this Strategic Update provide 

Defence with clear direction and certainty to underpin its planning 
to support Australia’s security.  However, Defence’s capability 
and funding plans must continue to be responsive to our rapidly 
changing circumstances.  The 2016 Defence White Paper set out the 
Government’s direction that Defence maintain alignment of strategy, 
capability and resources over time.

5.11  To ensure Defence remains responsive to the challenges of today and 
to those in the future, adjustments have been made to several projects 
planned in the 2016 Defence White Paper.  These adjustments are 
necessary to ensure the future ADF can project military power to shape 
our environment, deter actions against our interests and, when required, 
respond with effective military force.  Major adjustments include a 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE56

significant reduction in the planned modernisation and replacement of 
the G-Wagon vehicle fleet.  Defence will also adjust the composition of 
its intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, refuelling and airlift 
aircraft fleets and will not proceed with the purchase of an enhanced 
long-range search and rescue capability.  A number of infrastructure and 
enabling projects will also be adjusted.

5.12  Although resources have been allocated to implement this  

Strategic Update, further force structure adjustments and, potentially, 
trade-offs will be required over the medium to longer term.  In particular 
this could involve the introduction of additional, longer-range weapon 
systems, which are being developed and introduced into service in many 
advanced military forces and which will be critical for the ADF to be able 
to deliver credible deterrent effects.

5.13  Accordingly, the plans set out in this Strategic Update will be subject to 

regular review by Government and regular reporting to the Australian 
people through the Parliament.  The Government expects that Defence 
will continue to make investment decisions that balance expenditure 
on capability acquisition, sustainment, operating and workforce costs 
to ensure the Government’s strategy is delivered within the Defence 
budget.  Ongoing reform of the Defence organisation will be critical 
to continuing to deliver capability efficiently and effectively, and is 
addressed in the next chapter.

 
57

6

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE59

 ` Chapter Six: Reform

6.1 

6.2 

6.3 

6.4 

6.5 

6.6 

The Government has directed that the three pillars of strategy, capability 
and reform underpin all aspects of Defence planning and activity.  

Defence must be a single strategy-led and centrally directed 
organisation – one that is agile, proactive and effective in adapting to 
strategic and technological trends and changes.  To achieve this vision, 
Defence must improve its capacity to identify and seize opportunities for 
organisational reform. 

The 2015 First Principles Review commenced Defence’s transformation 
into an adaptive strategy-led organisation.  Implementation has 
enhanced Defence’s agility in strategic policy and capability 
development, including tighter alignment of strategic and force structure 
analysis, policy development, acquisition, research and development and 
industry policy. 

Defence is now driving its next phase of reform under Defence 2022 – 
Embedding One Defence. These reforms are strengthening Defence’s 
strategic centre and clarifying accountabilities to improve strategic 
performance and governance. 

The new strategic policy framework set out in this Strategic Update will 
be incorporated into Defence’s classified planning guidance.  This annual 
planning guidance directs all planning processes across Defence to 
ensure the ongoing alignment of strategy, capability and resources.

Defence continues to mature its approach to managing capability 
through an end-to-end capability life cycle.  Improvements in the 
processes and analysis of force design decisions are also enhancing 
Defence’s performance in developing and delivering capability.  
These improvements have underpinned the Government’s record 
of implementing its capability plans through significant numbers of 

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE60

capability investment approvals, while ensuring ongoing responsible and 
effective management of Defence’s resources.

6.7 

The culture of reform has also underpinned the development of the 
2020 Force Structure Plan.  

6.8  Work has commenced to determine further reforms necessary to deliver 

the outcomes required by this new strategy, including improving Defence’s 
accountability and reporting frameworks.  Stronger force design processes 
will be complemented through capability being managed as programs 
rather than individual projects.  Capability will be delivered through clearer 
and even more streamlined acquisition processes and in even closer 
partnership with Australian Defence Industry.

6.9 

Cultural reform undertaken through Pathway to Change: Evolving 
Defence Culture 2017-2022 continues to embed workplace norms and 
behaviours that support Defence people, help attract the best talent and 
promote Defence values.

6.10  Defence will further transform its business processes and integrate 
the delivery of corporate and enabling services to ensure Defence 
personnel focus on their core roles in delivering and supporting Defence 
capability.  These changes will strengthen Defence’s strategic centre, 
improve enterprise performance and governance, and redirect resources 
currently devoted to administering Defence to bolstering capability.

6.11  The outcome of these reforms is not simply about the extent to which 
Defence is performing well against its own internal measures, rather 
its capacity to ensure that its development and use of capability is 
sustainable and robust as well as transparent to all Australians through 
the Parliament.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE61

6.12  Continuous transformational reform is essential for building Defence’s 
capacity to respond to a more uncertain external environment.  Reform 
cannot be a one-off process – improvement is continual – and it must 
be purposeful.  Defence must continue to evolve and adapt to meet 
Australia’s changing strategic environment and maintain alignment of 
strategy, capability and resources.

2020 DEFENCE STRATEGIC UPDATE0

2

0DEFENCE

2

STRATEGIC

UPDATE

