Terms of Reference 

 
 
 
Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence: 
Terms of Reference 

I. OVERVIEW 

1. 
The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) is an initiative dedicated 
to artificial intelligence (AI) that will bring together countries that share the values reflected 
in Annex A Section 1: Principles for responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI and Section 
2: National policies and international co-operation for trustworthy AI of the OECD Council 
Recommendation  on  Artificial  Intelligence  (hereafter  the  “OECD  Recommendation  on 
AI”), and many of the greatest global AI experts from all relevant areas such as science, 
industry,  labour/trade  unions,  civil  society,  international  organisations,  and  the  public 
sector.   

2. 
GPAI  is  a  multistakeholder  initiative  grounded  in  the  political  will,  and  like-
mindedness, of its Members, its experts and others participating in its work. Membership 
and participation do not entail any legally binding rights or obligations under domestic or 
international law. 

1. Mission statement 

3. 
The mission of GPAI is to bring countries and experts together to support and guide 
the  responsible  adoption  of  AI  grounded  in  human  rights,  inclusion,  diversity,  gender 
equality,  innovation,  economic  growth,  and  environmental  and  societal  benefit,  while 
seeking to contribute concretely to the 2030 Agenda and the UN Sustainable Development 
Goals. GPAI facilitates international project-oriented collaboration in a multistakeholder 
and multidisciplinary manner with the scientific community, industry, labour/trade unions, 
civil society, international organisations, and countries, taking into particular account the 
interests,  contributions,  and  priorities  of  emerging  and  developing  countries.  GPAI 
collaborates  with  other  organisations  and  initiatives  and  draws  on  work  being  done 
domestically  and  internationally  to  identify  gaps,  maximise  coordination,  and  facilitate 
international collaboration on AI. GPAI seeks to leverage its multistakeholder nature and 
diverse membership to add a unique perspective to the international AI landscape. 

4. 
GPAI  offers  unique  value  in  the  global  AI  ecosystem  as  an  initiative  dedicated 
specifically  to  better  understanding  AI  challenges  and  understanding  and  shaping  AI 
opportunities, and one that convenes expertise from a wide range of sectors, disciplines, 
and countries to collaborate on applied projects in its Expert Working Groups. GPAI seeks 
to  bring  together  perspectives  from  countries  and  territories  with  differing  contexts, 
backgrounds, and experience, including by welcoming new Members. 

2. Work programme 

5. 
GPAI undertakes applied projects on AI (“Projects”) and provides a mechanism for 
sharing  multidisciplinary  analysis,  foresight  and  coordination  on  outcomes,  with  the 
objective of facilitating collaboration, maximising synergies, and reducing duplication in 
the area of AI. GPAI assesses – on a comprehensive, objective, open, and transparent basis 
–  the  scientific,  technical  and  socio-economic  information  relevant to  understanding  AI 

 
impacts,  encouraging  its  responsible  development  and  options  for  adaptation  and 
mitigation of potential challenges.  

6. 
GPAI  Projects  are  conducted  in  line  with  the  priorities  of  GPAI  Members  to 
facilitate  international  multistakeholder  analysis  and  understanding  of  key  AI-related 
issues.  GPAI  Projects  aim  to  be  applicable,  as  appropriate,  to  different  contexts  across 
Members and help inform their policy-making. Projects may include, amongst other things, 
consolidating and assessing existing information, research, analysis, and good practices, 
developing datasets, developing tools related to AI application, and identifying areas for 
future work.  

7. 
GPAI focuses on the application of AI and the implementation of the principles set 
out in Annex A, rather than on developing high-level AI norms or policy. GPAI will not 
work on issues of national defence. 

3. Outputs 

8. 

GPAI will deliver outputs, including the following: 

•  From Expert Working Groups: Reports, tools, systems, datasets, or other outputs 
relevant to the application of AI in practice. Expert Working Group reports may, 
for example, consolidate and assess existing information, research, analysis, and 
good  practices,  propose  areas  for  deeper  collaboration,  or  present  the  findings, 
outcomes, or outputs of Expert Working Groups’ Projects. Expert Working Groups 
may  also  make  practical  recommendations,  for  example,  as  to  how  AI  can  be 
applied and adopted in practice in line with the Principles set out in Annex A. 

•  From the Multistakeholder Expert  Group: An Annual Report synthesising the 
work of the Expert Working Groups and of the Multistakeholder Expert Group , 
including any practical recommendations as to how AI can be applied and adopted 
in  practice,  assessing  key  AI  developments  and  trends,  and  taking  into 
consideration the interests of GPAI Members. The Multistakeholder Expert Group 
will  also  propose  themes  for  the  Multistakeholder  Expert  Group  and  Expert 
Working Groups for the following year (these may be new or ongoing). 

Disclaimers will be used in all GPAI outputs to clearly identify whose views they represent 
(e.g. GPAI Members, GPAI Experts, groups of GPAI Experts, etc.). A disclaimer will be 
included in all GPAI publications, reports, or other outputs stating clearly that GPAI is a 
separate entity from the OECD and that, accordingly, the opinions expressed and arguments 
employed therein do not reflect the views of the OECD or its Members. 

II. MEMBERSHIP AND PARTICIPATION 

1. Membership 

9. 

Membership of GPAI is open to countries and the European Union. 

10.  Membership Application Process: 

•  Those interested in membership should contact the GPAI Secretariat and provide 
an  application  that  includes  a  letter  of  intent  that  sets  out  reasons  for  seeking 
membership, as well as confirmation that the applicant endorses the shared values 
reflected  in  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  AI  by  adherence  thereto  or,  for 

 
applicants  which  are  not  adherents  to  the  OECD  Recommendation  on  AI,  the 
principles set out in Annex A. 

•  Upon receipt of an application, the Executive Council will assess: 

o  The applicant’s commitment to responsible AI and the shared values reflected 
in the OECD Recommendation on AI or the principles set out in Annex A; 

o  The  degree  to  which  the  applicant  takes  a  proactive  role  in  advancing 
responsible AI, grounded in human rights, both on domestic and international 
levels, as well as with organisations and initiatives; and 

o  The level of expertise of AI experts working in the region, across a variety of 
sectors and disciplines, taking into account the differences that exist between 
regions  and  the  need  to  integrate  experts  from  a  range  of  regions  that  is  as 
diverse and representative as possible. 

•  The  Steering  Committee  will  be  invited  to  discuss  and  transmit  any  views  on 
applicants to the Executive Council to be taken into account in the assessment of 
applicants. 

•  Once  the  Executive  Council’s  assessment  is  complete,  it  will  transmit  its 

recommendation to the Ministerial Council for decision. 

•  Unsuccessful applicants may apply to become GPAI Members again in the future. 

•  The Executive Council may develop further procedures for assessing membership 

applications. 

•  The  Executive  Council  will  take  steps  to  foster  engagement  with  prospective 

Members from under-represented regions on an ongoing basis.  

2. GPAI Experts, Observers, external experts 

GPAI Experts: 

11. 
GPAI will include opportunities for participation by a broad range of international 
experts from a variety of stakeholder groups, disciplines, and sectors, including science, 
industry, labour/trade union, civil society, international organisations, and the public sector. 
Experts  appointed  to  participate  formally  in  the  Multistakeholder  Expert  Group  and 
assigned thereafter to any Expert Working Groups or Projects will be referred to as “GPAI 
Experts”.  

12. 
GPAI  Experts  are  selected  and  participate  in  GPAI  as  individuals,  and  do  not 
represent  any  organisation  or  country.  GPAI  Experts  need  not  be  nationals  of  GPAI 
Members.  GPAI  Experts  are  appointed  by  the  Executive  Council  for  three-year  terms. 
GPAI Experts may be re-appointed to successive terms. Where a GPAI Expert is assigned 
to  a  Project  that  is  ongoing  at  the  time  of  the  expiry  of  their  term  and  they  are  not  re-
appointed, the Steering Committee may decide to extend their appointment until the end of 
the Project. The maximum number of GPAI Experts serving at one time may not exceed 
six times the number of GPAI Members. 

13. 

GPAI Expert Application Process: 

•  GPAI Experts may be nominated by Members or self-nominated. 

•  Each GPAI Member may nominate up to three GPAI Experts.  

 
• 

Individuals with expertise relevant to AI that wish to be appointed as GPAI Experts 
may self-nominate by submitting a curriculum vitae and a statement of interest to 
the  GPAI  Secretariat  comprising  a  letter  setting  out  their  reasons  for  seeking  to 
participate  in  GPAI  as  well  as  confirmation  that  they  support  the  shared  values 
reflected in the OECD Recommendation on AI and set out in Annex A. Applicants 
may be asked to provide further information relevant to their applications. 

•  The Executive Council appoints GPAI Experts on the basis of a recommendation 
by the Steering Committee. The Executive Council and Steering Committee will 
work  to  ensure  balance  between  different  stakeholder  groups  (science,  industry, 
labour/trade union, civil society, and international organisations), balance between 
member-nominated  and  self-nominated  GPAI  Experts,  as  well  as  diversity, 
including across nationalities and gender. 

Observers:  

14. 
International organisations focused on AI may be invited to send a representative 
to  Ministerial  Council,  Executive  Council,  Multistakeholder  Expert  Group,  or  Expert 
Working Group meetings as Observers, either for a period of one year, or on an ad hoc 
basis for individual meetings or parts of meetings.  

Individuals  or  representatives  of  other  relevant  organisations  may  be  invited  to 
the  Executive  Council,  Steering  Committee,  or 

15. 
observe  Ministerial  Council, 
Multistakeholder Expert Group meetings, or parts thereof, on an ad hoc basis.  

16. 
The Executive Council will decide on inviting such Observers to Ministerial and 
Executive Council meetings, together with any conditions on their invitation. The Steering 
Committee will decide on inviting such Observers to the Multistakeholder Expert Group, 
together with any conditions on their invitation. The Expert Working Groups will decide 
on  inviting  Observers  to  their  own  meetings,  together  with  any  conditions  on  their 
invitation. Observers will attend relevant meetings or parts thereof and may be invited by 
the  Chair  to  speak,  but  will  not  take  part  in  decision-making.  Observership  may  be 
terminated by the Executive Council or the body that granted it at any time by two-thirds 
majority vote.   

OECD  Members  may  collectively  observe  meetings  of  the  Steering  Committee 

17. 
through one “rapporteur”.  

18. 
In its status as permanent observer, the OECD Secretariat may attend all meetings 
of  the  GPAI  Council,  Steering  Committee,  and  other  GPAI  bodies  and  may  contribute 
substantively to agenda items.  

External experts: 

19. 
Other individuals may be invited to attend Expert Working Group meetings or parts 
of Expert Working Group meetings as external experts on an ad hoc basis in their individual 
capacity pursuant to the same decision-making rules as Observers  with a view to filling 
specific gaps in expertise or otherwise supporting the work of the Expert Working Groups. 

3. Expectations of Members, GPAI Experts, Observers, and external experts 

20. 
All GPAI Members, GPAI Experts, Observers, and external experts must commit 
to  the  advancement  of  responsible  AI  and  the  shared  values  reflected  in  the  OECD 
Recommendation on AI or the Principles set out in Annex A. 

 
21. 
Any Member or GPAI Expert may withdraw from GPAI at any time by submitting 
a letter to the GPAI Secretariat indicating their withdrawal. The GPAI Secretariat will then 
inform the GPAI Expert Support Centres, the Steering Committee, and GPAI Executive 
Council.   

22.  Members: The Steering Committee or Executive Council may launch a review of 
whether  a  Member  is  acting  consistently  with  the  shared  values  reflected  in  the  OECD 
Recommendation on AI or the Principles set out in Annex A by simple majority vote. The 
Member under review will be informed in writing when the review process is initiated, and 
it will be invited to submit information in response for inclusion in a written report. If, upon 
consideration of this report, as well as any information submitted by the Member under 
review, the Ministerial Council agrees by a two-thirds majority vote that the Member has 
not met its commitments as a GPAI Member, its membership will be terminated. GPAI 
Members whose membership has been terminated may re-apply for membership. The new 
application should include information on any steps taken to address concerns outlined in 
the report supporting its termination, or any other concerns communicated by the GPAI 
Council.  

23. 
GPAI Members are expected to contribute to funding the GPAI Secretariat budget 
in equal shares, committing their annual share before the end of the preceding year, unless 
given an exception by Council. 

24. 
GPAI  Experts,  Observers,  and  external  experts  are  required,  in  the  context  of 
agreeing to engage with GPAI, to declare the absence of any conflict of interest and commit 
to avoid any actual, apparent or potential conflicts of interest, commit to the shared values 
reflected in the OECD Recommendation on AI or the Principles set out in Annex A, as well 
as to any other conditions of their engagement. Should the Executive Council decide that a 
GPAI Expert, Observer, or external expert has acted in a manner contrary to the shared 
values reflected in the OECD Recommendation on AI or the Principles set out in Annex A, 
or has a conflict of interest, they will no longer be invited to participate in GPAI. 

III. STRUCTURE 

1. GPAI Council 

Purpose: Provides strategic direction to GPAI and holds ultimate decision-making 

25. 
authority. 

26. 

Formats and composition: The GPAI Council meets in two formats: 

•  Once per year at Ministerial level (Ministerial Council) or as otherwise decided by 
the GPAI Members, with high-level representatives (Minister or Deputy-Minister 
equivalent) from all GPAI Members. Meetings may be held in person or virtually 
at the discretion of the Lead Chair. 

•  Three  times  per  year  at  working  level  (Executive  Council),  with  representatives 
from  all  GPAI  Members.  The  Lead  Chair  may  call  further  Executive  Council 
meetings  either  on their  own  initiative or following a  request  from  one  or more 
GPAI Members. Meetings may be held in person or virtually. 

The  Ministerial  and  Executive  Councils may invite  ad  hoc  Observers,  including 

27. 
GPAI Experts, to attend their meetings or parts thereof. 

 
28. 
Chairing arrangements: The GPAI Council is led by three GPAI Members serving 
in  staggered  one-year  terms  –  a  current  year  Lead  Chair  supported  by  Outgoing  and 
Incoming Support Chairs. The GPAI Council elects a new Incoming Chair annually by a 
simple majority vote. 

29. 

The Lead Chair, with the support of the Support Chairs: 

•  Chairs meetings of the GPAI Council; 

•  Unless otherwise agreed, hosts and organises the annual Ministerial Council and 

GPAI Summit; 

•  Plays  a  leading  role  in  communicating  externally  on  behalf  of  GPAI  Members, 

under the guidance of the Executive Council. 

30. 
The  Incoming  Support  Chair  proposes  themes  to  be  addressed  by  the 
Multistakeholder Expert Group and Expert Working Groups in the following year. These 
proposed  themes  should  be  developed  in  consultation  with  the  Lead  Chair,  Outgoing 
Support Chair, and on the basis of the themes proposed by the Multistakeholder Expert 
Group  and  broader  GPAI  work  and  outputs.  The  Executive  Council  will  discuss  the 
Incoming Support Chair’s proposal and submit a final proposal to the Ministerial Council 
for approval. 

31. 

Decision-making: 

•  Decisions are made by two-thirds majority votes unless provided otherwise in these 
Terms  of  Reference.  Votes  will  be  conducted  only  in  cases  where  one  or  more 
Members object to a proposed decision. 

•  Decisions may be taken through written procedure. Unless the Lead Chair, having 
consulted with the Support Chairs, considers it justified to shorten such period in a 
specific case, GPAI Members will be given two weeks within which to raise any 
objection. 

32. 

Responsibilities of the Ministerial Council: 

•  Approves the admission of new GPAI Members; 

•  Approves the themes to be addressed by the Multistakeholder Expert Group and 
Expert  Working  Groups,  including  both  the  approval  of  new  themes  or  the 
maintenance and continuation of existing themes;  

•  Welcomes and  discusses the  Multistakeholder  Expert  Group  Annual  Report and 

Expert Working Group outputs; 

•  Approves the establishment of Expert Support Centres; 

•  When appropriate, issues public statements or recommendations based on the work 

of the Multistakeholder Expert Group and Expert Working Groups;  

33. 

Responsibilities of the Executive Council: 

•  Makes recommendations to the Ministerial Council on membership; 

•  Approves exceptions to the principle that Members fund GPAI in equal shares;  

•  Appoints the three additional government representatives (beyond the Chairs of the 

GPAI Council) to the Steering Committee;  

 
•  Appoints GPAI Experts, on the recommendation of the Steering Committee; 

•  Approves the proposal of themes to be addressed by the Multistakeholder Expert 
Group and Expert Working Groups in the following year to the Ministerial Council, 
on  the  basis of the  draft proposed themes  put  forward  by  the  Incoming  Support 
Chair and taking into account the Multistakeholder Expert Group proposed themes 
and broader GPAI work and outputs; 

•  Establishes, maintains, and discontinues Expert Working Groups on the proposal 

of the Steering Committee; 

•  Approves Expert Working Group Projects through the approval of annual Work 

Plans; 

•  Assigns Expert Working Groups to Expert Support Centres; 

•  Approves the assignment of specific Projects to National AI Institutes or groups of 

National AI Institutes; 

•  Makes recommendations to the Ministerial Council on the establishment of Expert 

Support Centres; 

•  Develops  a  branding  and  communications  policy  in  order  to  ensure  appropriate 
branding, visibility, and accountability for all outputs related to GPAI taking into 
account reputational risk;  

•  Develops complementary governance procedures to support the implementation of 

these Terms of Reference where necessary; 

•  Provides substantive guidance and direction to the GPAI Secretariat and the Expert 

Support Centres; 

•  Approves the GPAI budget, including both the three-year GPAI Secretariat Budget, 
together  with  –  subject  to  the  development  of  governance  procedures  by  the 
Executive Council – the rolling three-year budget (reviewed annually) for pooled 
seed funding for Expert Working Group Projects; 

•  As appropriate, engages the OECD Council to discuss areas of mutual interest.  

2. Steering Committee 

34. 
Purpose: Provides a forum for co-ordination and exchange between Members and 
GPAI Experts, ensuring that the broader views of GPAI Experts are fed into and taken into 
account in the preparation of GPAI Council decisions and that GPAI Members’ views are 
taken into  account  in  such  decisions relating  to the  functioning  of  the  Multistakeholder 
Expert Group and Expert Working Groups. 

35. 

Composition: 

Government participants (6 total): 

‒ 

‒ 

3 government representatives, 1 from each chair of the GPAI Council. 

2 government representatives appointed by the Executive Council.  

1 government representative from an emerging or developing country 

‒ 
appointed by the Executive Council. 

 
GPAI Expert participants (6 total): 

‒ 

1 Chair of the Multistakeholder Expert Group; 

1  science  representative,  1  industry  representative,  1  civil  society 
international 

labour/trade  union  representative;  and  1 

‒ 
representative;  1 
organisation representative.  

36.  Where there are fewer nominations than participant seats, such seats will remain 
vacant.  Where  a  seat  becomes  vacant  during  the  year,  a  call  for  nominations  may  be 
launched  to  fill the  seat  pursuant to  the  normal  Steering  Committee  participant election 
process. 

37. 
Government  participants  on  the  Steering  Committee  will  gather  and  seek  to 
represent the views of all GPAI Members in Steering Committee meetings and decision-
making.  

GPAI Expert participants will gather and seek to represent the views of all GPAI 

38. 
Experts in Steering Committee meetings and decision-making. 

39. 
The Steering Committee may meet in an extended format in which representatives 
of all GPAI Members and all Expert Working Group Co-chairs may attend and be invited 
to comment in discussions as observers. The Steering Committee will not take decisions in 
extended format. 

40. 
Chairing  arrangements:  The  Chair  of  the  GPAI  Council  and  the  Chair  of  the 
Multistakeholder Expert Group will co-chair the Steering Committee. Where the Chair of 
the Multistakeholder Expert Group cannot attend a meeting, they may designate another 
GPAI Expert participant on the Steering Committee to chair in their place. 

41.  Meetings: Twice per year or as determined by the Steering Committee. Meetings 
may be held in person or virtually.  

42. 

Decision-making: 

•  Decisions are made by two-thirds majority vote. Votes will be conducted only in 
cases  where  one  or  more Steering  Committee participants  objects to  a proposed 
decision. 

•  Decisions may be taken through written procedure. Unless the Co-Chairs consider 
it justified to shorten such period in a specific case, Steering Committee participants 
will be given two weeks within which to make any objection. 

43. 

Responsibilities: 

•  Develops guidance, in consultation with the Executive Council, to support Expert 

Working Groups in developing Project proposals; 

•  Develops the Work Plan based on the Projects proposed by the Expert Working 
Groups and, after consulting the proposing Expert Working Group on any changes, 
transmits the Work Plan to the Executive Council for approval;  

•  Assigns  GPAI  Experts  to  Expert  Working  Groups,  taking  into  account  GPAI 
Experts’ expressed interests and the importance of fostering diversity and inclusion 
across the Expert Working Groups; 

•  Makes proposals on the establishment, maintenance, and discontinuation of Expert 

Working Groups to the Executive Council; 

 
•  Resolves  or  refers  to  the  Executive  Council  issues  in  the  internal  processes  and 

functioning of Expert Working Groups, where necessary; 

•  Makes proposals to the Executive Council and Multistakeholder Expert Group to 
foster closer collaboration between Members and Experts and ensures collaboration 
across and between Expert Working Groups. 

3. Multistakeholder Expert Group  

44. 
Purpose: Brings together GPAI Experts to collaborate, including by sharing best 
practices and analyses, and to develop Annual Reports based on the outputs developed by 
the Expert Working Groups. The Multistakeholder Expert Group also proposes themes to 
be  addressed  by  the  Multistakeholder  Expert  Group  and  Expert  Working  Groups  the 
following year.  

45. 

Composition: All GPAI Experts participate in the Multistakeholder Expert Group. 

46. 
Chairing arrangements: The Chair of the Multistakeholder Expert Group is elected 
annually  from  among  GPAI  Experts  from  science,  industry,  civil  society,  labour/trade 
unions, and international organisations by a majority vote of GPAI Experts. Chairs may be 
re-elected twice. 

47.  Meetings: At least once per year in person during the GPAI Summit. Meetings may 
be  held  in  person  or  virtually.  GPAI  Members  may  participate  as  observers  in  the 
Multistakeholder Experts Group meeting during the GPAI Summit.  

48. 

Responsibilities: 

•  Provides a forum and mechanisms for GPAI Experts to exchange and collaborate, 

including by sharing best practices and analysis; 

•  Proposes  themes  for  the  Multistakeholder  Expert  Group  and  Expert  Working 

Groups for the following year (these may be new or ongoing); 

•  Develops an Annual Report synthesising the work of the Expert Working Groups 
and setting out an overview of AI developments. An editorial committee comprised 
of GPAI Experts and including the MEG Chair, the GPAI Expert participants on 
the Steering Committee, and the Expert Working Group Co-Chairs will lead the 
development of the Annual Report, supported by the Expert Support Centres; 

•  Reviews  Expert  Working  Group  outputs  prior  to  their  submission  to  the  GPAI 

Council. 

4. Expert Working Groups 

Purpose:  Expert  Working  Groups  propose  and  carry  out  approved  Projects  and 

49. 
develop reports and other outputs. 

50. 

Composition: Appointed GPAI Experts assigned by the Steering Committee. 

•  GPAI Experts interested in participating in an Expert Working Group must submit 

their expression of interest to the Steering Committee.  

51. 

Chairing arrangements: 

 
•  Expert Working Groups select their own Co-Chairs. Any GPAI Experts assigned 
to  a  Working  Group  may  self-nominate  to  become  Expert  Working  Group  Co-
chairs by simple majority vote. 

•  Expert  Working  Group  Co-Chairs  serve  one-year  terms  and  may  be  re-elected 
twice. Further re-elections may occur where no other GPAI Experts assigned to a 
Working Group are willing or able to co-chair. 

52. 

Decision-making: Decisions are made by two-thirds majority votes.   

53.  Meetings: Called by each Expert Working Group Chair(s). Meetings may be held 
in  person  or  virtually.  Expert  Working  Groups  may  decide  to  open  their  meetings  to 
interested GPAI Member observers. 

54. 

Responsibilities and functioning: 

•  Propose  Projects  annually  to  the  Steering  Committee  for  transmission  to  the 

Executive Council for approval, in the form of a Work Plan; 

•  Carry out the approved GPAI Projects assigned to them. Expert Working Groups 
will select three or more GPAI Experts as Project Leads for each Project. Where all 
Project  Leads  agree,  Expert  Working  Groups  may  work  with  individuals  or 
organisations,  other  than  GPAI  Experts  assigned  to  the  Working  Group.  GPAI 
Expert Working Group outputs must be approved by all Project Leads and be the 
sole responsibility of Expert Working Group GPAI Experts. Expert Working Group 
outputs must clearly indicate all GPAI Experts that have approved them, as well as 
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  involvement  of  any  external  individuals  or 
organisations in the Project and the development of the output; 

•  Submit  working  draft  outputs  or  update  reports  to  the  Steering  Committee  and 

Executive Council for consultation and comments; 

•  Organise  workshops  to  discuss  their  ongoing  Projects  with  interested  Members, 

with the support of the Expert Support Centres and the GPAI Secretariat; 

•  The OECD will be invited to participate in each Expert Working Group to ensure 
that the Expert Working Groups are apprised of the OECD’s work on AI and to 
avoid duplication of the OECD’s Programme of Work.  

5a. GPAI Secretariat 

55. 

Purpose: Supports the GPAI Council and Steering Committee.  

Structure:  Through  an  agreement  between  the  OECD  and  GPAI  Members,  the 

56. 
GPAI Secretariat will be hosted by the OECD. 

57. 

Responsibilities (subject to the availability of funding): 

•  Plans  and  supports  GPAI  Ministerial  and  Executive  Council  and  Steering 
Committee  meetings,  including  preparing  relevant  documentation  and  proposals 
for discussion and/or decision, and supporting the implementation of decisions; 

•  Administers the election of the Incoming Chair of the GPAI Council and the three 
government  participants  on  the  Steering  Committee  that  are  not  GPAI  Council 
Chairs; 

 
•  Regularly consults with the Lead Chair between meetings of the Ministerial and 

Executive Council on ongoing GPAI activities; 

•  Provides  regular  reports  and  updates  to  the  GPAI  Council  and  the  Steering 
Committee on the policy analysis being done domestically and internationally in 
the area of AI; 

•  Supports  Council  decisions  on  prospective  Members  by  preparing  background 
materials  and  information  to  support  Council  discussions  and  decisions,  in 
consultation with the Expert Support Centres; 

•  Organises  and prepares  documents,  reports, minutes, and  other  materials  for the 

GPAI Council and Steering Committee as needed; 

•  Provides information management for the GPAI Council and Steering Committee 
and  maintains  all  official  correspondence  of  GPAI  Council  and  Steering 
Committee; 

•  Acts  as  the  principal  point  of  contact  for  GPAI  Members,  GPAI  Experts,  and 
Observers, as well as the general public, on all matters relating to the GPAI Council 
and Steering Committee;  

•  Co-ordinates cross-GPAI administrative and procedural issues under the guidance 
of the Executive Council, and not including any technical or substantive aspects of 
the work of the Multistakeholder Expert Group or the Expert Working Groups; 

•  Puts in place and manages a mechanism or platform through which Members can 
communicate  with  GPAI  Experts,  and  GPAI  Experts  can  share  their  work  with 
Members on an ongoing basis, with the support of the Expert Support Centres; 

• 

Implements the GPAI communications and branding policy under the guidance of 
the Executive Council, in consultation with the Lead Chair, and noting the Lead 
Chair’s role in communicating on behalf of GPAI Members; 

•  Subject to the development of governance procedures by the Executive Council, 
accepts and administers financial contributions for pooled seed funding to support 
approved Expert Working Group Projects and contracting with service providers 
or external experts, both in line with applicable OECD rules and policies; 

•  Promotes and maintains GPAI’s cooperation with other multilateral initiatives and 

organisations, among others; 

•  Facilitates the exchange of information and synergies between GPAI and OECD 
AI  initiatives  and  Programme  of  Work,  including  the  OECD  AI  Policy 
Observatory,  and  provides,  in  consultation  with  the  Lead  Chair,  updates  to  the 
OECD Committee on Digital Economy Policy and its Working Party on Artificial 
Intelligence Governance on the scope and direction of GPAI Projects; and  

•  Develops, tracks, and reports on the budget of the GPAI Secretariat and – subject 
to  the  development  of  governance  procedures  by  the  Executive  Council  –  the 
pooled seed funding for Expert Working Group Projects.  

5b. GPAI Expert Support Centres  

Purpose:  Provide  operational  and  administrative  assistance  to  Expert  Working 

58. 
Groups and to the Multistakeholder Expert Group.  

 
59. 

60. 

Structure: GPAI Expert Support Centres are established by GPAI Members. 

Responsibilities:  

•  Plan and support meetings of the Expert Working Groups and the Multistakeholder 

Expert Group;  

•  Support Expert Working Groups in conducting their Projects; 

•  Administer the election of the Chair of the Multistakeholder Expert Group and the 

non-governmental participants in the Steering Committee; 

•  Collectively support collaboration across and between Expert Working Groups; 

•  Support Expert Working Groups in their collaboration with external individuals, 

organisations, or other entities on their Projects; 

•  Accept, administer, and engage financial contributions to support Expert Working 
Group Projects, including contracting with service providers or external experts, 
excluding  the  pooled  seed  funding  accepted  and  administered  by  the  GPAI 
Secretariat – subject to the development of governance procedures by the Executive 
Council – and in accordance with these Terms of Reference and any further relevant 
transparency and approval procedures determined by GPAI Members:  

•  Develop, track, and report on the budget funding the activities of the Expert Support 
Centres and Expert Working Group Projects, beyond any pooled seed funding.  

6. National AI Institutes 

61.  Where  approved  by  the  Executive  Council,  GPAI  Members  may  provide 
operational support and administrative support, in addition to expertise, to specific Expert 
Working  Group  Projects  through  National  AI  institutes.  The  Executive  Council  will 
develop  procedures  for  assigning  Projects  to  National  AI  institutes  and  ensuring  co-
ordination with the Expert Support Centres.  

62. 
In  this  role,  National  AI  institutes  will  follow  all  procedures  and  requirements 
relating to Projects set down in these Terms of Reference or as determined by the GPAI 
Executive Council. 

IV. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS 

1. GPAI Summit 

63. 
A GPAI Summit will be held annually. The Summit will comprise the Ministerial 
Council  meeting,  as  well  as  a  plenary  meeting  of  the  Multistakeholder  Expert  Group. 
Unless otherwise agreed, the summit will be hosted and organised by the Lead Chair, with 
the  support  of  the  GPAI  Secretariat  and,  in  relation  to  the  organisation  of  the 
Multistakeholder Expert Group plenary meeting, with the support of the Expert Support 
Centres and in consultation with the Steering Committee.  

2. Working Methods 

64. 
Conflicts of interest: GPAI Experts, Observers, and external experts shall strive to 
avoid any actual, apparent, or potential conflict of interest. They shall recuse themselves 
from  participating  and/or  making  any  decisions  where  self-interest  is  involved.  The 
Executive Council may establish a committee or other mechanism to address complaints 

 
and concerns related to potential conflicts of interest. In situations necessitating immediate 
action,  the  Executive  Council  and  Steering  Committee  can  review  the  complaint  or 
concerns. The Executive Council may set out further guidance on this process.  

65. 
Confidentiality: The confidentiality of all meetings will be defined by the Chair(s) 
of the relevant GPAI body (GPAI Council, GPAI Steering Committee, Multistakeholder 
Expert Group, Expert Working Groups) according to the topics discussed. To safeguard the 
transparency of GPAI, information on discussions of the Multistakeholder Expert Group, 
Expert Working Groups, the Steering Committee, and the Council will be made public, for 
example  through  summaries  of  discussions  without  attributing  remarks  to  participants 
where appropriate, in line with further guidance to be elaborate by these bodies.  

Compensation: GPAI Experts and Observers shall not receive any honorarium, fee 

66. 
or other remuneration from GPAI.  

3. Funding and other contributions 

67. 
The GPAI Secretariat is funded in equal shares by GPAI Members provided in the 
form of voluntary contributions. Funding for each year is expected to be committed before 
the end of the preceding year. The Secretariat’s Programme of Work and Budget will be 
agreed  by  the  Executive  Council  for  three  years  every  three  years.  Additional  in-kind 
contributions  from  Members  or  other  entities  (e.g.  loaning  or  seconding  staff)  may  be 
accepted by the OECD under its accepted rules, procedures, and policies.  

68. 
Expert Support Centres are not funded from the GPAI Secretariat’s budget or the 
pooled seed funding for GPAI Projects to be administered by the GPAI Secretariat subject 
to the development of governance procedures by the Executive Council. 

69.  Members  fund  all  of  their  representatives’  travel  and  accommodation  costs  for 
attending GPAI meetings and events such as the GPAI Council and Steering Committee 
meetings. GPAI Members will take measures to facilitate and support the participation of 
emerging or developing country GPAI Members where they are unable to mobilise such 
funds. 

The Executive Council will consider further means to foster and support broad and 

70. 
diverse participation in GPAI meetings on an ongoing basis. 

71. 
Expert Working Group Projects may be supported by financial or in-kind support. 
GPAI Members may submit contributions to a common pool of seed funding administered 
by  the  GPAI  Secretariat  subject  to  the  development  of  governance  procedures  by  the 
Executive Council. In addition, or alternatively, further financial or in-kind contributions 
may be made to approved Projects on a project-by-project basis by GPAI Members or other 
contributors,  including  via  the  GPAI  Expert  Support  Centres,  which  will  accept  and 
administer  such  contributions  in  line  with  relevant  procedures  as  determined  by  GPAI 
Members. 

72. 

In this regard: 

a  All engagement with service providers or external contributors to Expert Working 
Group Projects must be in line with these Terms of Reference insofar as they apply 
to such Projects or their outcomes, including the prerogatives and responsibilities 
of the Expert Working Groups and other GPAI structures; 

b 

In  carrying  out  their  respective  roles,  the  GPAI  Secretariat  and  Expert  Support 
Centres are responsible for ensuring that GPAI Experts, Observers, and external 

 
experts  meet  the  expectations,  as  well  as  the  provisions  regarding  conflict  of 
interest, set out in these Terms of Reference; 

c  The GPAI Secretariat and Expert Support Centres are responsible for ensuring that 
all engagement with service providers and external contributors on Expert Working 
Group  Projects,  including  the  terms  of  any  relevant  agreements,  respect  these 
requirements and that the Projects continue to reflect the proposals as approved in 
GPAI; 

d  To ensure accountability and oversight in relation to the provision of financial or 
in-kind contributions on a project-by-project basis via the Expert Support Centres, 
where a planned collaboration would involve the provision of funds, or other forms 
of support and collaboration that are significant, the Expert Support Centres will 
provide the Executive Council and Steering Committee with advance information 
on the planned collaboration. Where a Member objects to a planned collaboration, 
the  collaboration  will  not  proceed.  Further  procedures  in  this  regard  may  be 
determined by the Executive Council. 

4. Modifications to the Terms of Reference 

73. 
The  GPAI  Terms  of  Reference,  and  other  key  governing  documents,  are  to  be 
reviewed  at  least  every  three  years  by  the  Executive  Council,  in  consultation  with  the 
Steering Committee and supported by the GPAI Secretariat, and proposed changes are to 
be submitted for approval at the GPAI Ministerial Council by a two-thirds majority vote. 
The Executive Council may decide to review the GPAI Terms of Reference at any time. 

 
 
 
 
Annex A. PRINCIPLES ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 

74. 
The  following  principles  are  drawn  verbatim  from  Section  1:  Principles  for 
responsible  stewardship  of  trustworthy  AI  and  Section  2:  National  policies  and 
international co-operation for trustworthy AI of the OECD Recommendation of the Council 
on Artificial Intelligence: 

Section 1: Principles for responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI 

1.1. Inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being 

75. 
Stakeholders should proactively engage in responsible stewardship of trustworthy 
AI in pursuit of beneficial outcomes for people and the planet, such as augmenting human 
capabilities and enhancing creativity, advancing inclusion of underrepresented populations, 
reducing  economic,  social,  gender  and  other  inequalities,  and  protecting  natural 
environments, thus invigorating inclusive growth, sustainable development and well-being. 

1.2. Human-centred values and fairness 

76. 
AI  actors  should  respect  the  rule  of  law,  human  rights  and  democratic  values, 
throughout the AI system lifecycle. These include freedom, dignity and autonomy, privacy 
and data protection, non-discrimination and equality, diversity, fairness, social justice, and 
internationally recognised labour rights. 

77. 
To  this  end,  AI  actors  should  implement  mechanisms  and  safeguards,  such  as 
capacity for human determination, that are appropriate to the context and consistent with 
the state of art. 

1.3. Transparency and explainability 

78. 
AI Actors should commit to transparency and responsible disclosure regarding AI 
systems.  To  this  end,  they  should  provide  meaningful  information,  appropriate  to  the 
context, and consistent with the state of art:  

1.  to foster a general understanding of AI systems, 

2.  to make stakeholders aware of their interactions with AI systems, including in the 

workplace, 

3.  to enable those affected by an AI system to understand the outcome, and, 

4.  to enable those adversely affected by an AI system to challenge its outcome based 
on  plain  and  easy-to-understand  information  on  the  factors,  and  the  logic  that 
served as the basis for the prediction, recommendation or decision. 

1.4. Robustness, security and safety 

79. 
AI systems should be robust, secure and safe throughout their entire lifecycle so 
that, in conditions of normal use, foreseeable use or misuse, or other adverse conditions, 
they function appropriately and do not pose unreasonable safety risk. 

 
 
80. 
To this end, AI actors should ensure traceability, including in relation to datasets, 
processes and decisions made during the AI system lifecycle, to enable analysis of the AI 
system’s outcomes and responses to inquiry, appropriate to the context and consistent with 
the state of art. 

81. 
AI actors should, based on their roles, the context, and their ability to act, apply a 
systematic  risk  management  approach  to  each  phase  of  the  AI  system  lifecycle  on  a 
continuous basis to address risks related to AI systems, including privacy, digital security, 
safety and bias. 

1.5. Accountability 

82. 
AI actors should be accountable for the proper functioning of AI systems and for 
the respect of the above principles, based on their roles, the context, and consistent with 
the state of art. 

Section 2: National policies and international co-operation for trustworthy AI 

2.1. Investing in AI research and development 

83. 
Governments should consider long-term public investment, and encourage private 
investment,  in  research  and  development,  including  interdisciplinary  efforts,  to  spur 
innovation in trustworthy AI that focus on challenging technical issues and on AI-related 
social, legal and ethical implications and policy issues. 

84. 
Governments  should  also  consider  public  investment  and  encourage  private 
investment in open datasets that are representative and respect privacy and data protection 
to support an environment for AI research and development that is free of inappropriate 
bias and to improve interoperability and use of standards. 

2.2. Fostering a digital ecosystem for AI 

85. 
Governments should foster the development of, and access to, a digital ecosystem 
for  trustworthy  AI.  Such  an  ecosystem  includes  in  particular  digital  technologies  and 
infrastructure, and mechanisms for sharing AI knowledge, as appropriate. In this regard, 
governments should consider promoting mechanisms, such as data trusts, to support the 
safe, fair, legal and ethical sharing of data. 

2.3. Shaping an enabling policy environment for AI 

86. 
Governments should promote a policy environment that supports an agile transition 
from  the  research  and  development  stage  to  the  deployment  and  operation  stage  for 
trustworthy  AI  systems.  To  this  effect,  they  should  consider  using  experimentation  to 
provide  a  controlled  environment  in  which  AI  systems  can  be  tested,  and  scaled-up,  as 
appropriate. 

87. 
Governments should review and adapt, as appropriate, their policy and regulatory 
frameworks  and  assessment  mechanisms  as  they  apply  to  AI  systems  to  encourage 
innovation and competition for trustworthy AI. 

2.4. Building human capacity and preparing for labour market transformation 

88. 
Governments  should  work  closely  with  stakeholders  to  prepare  for  the 
transformation  of  the  world  of  work  and  of  society.  They  should  empower  people  to 

 
effectively use and interact with AI systems across the breadth of applications, including 
by equipping them with the necessary skills. 

89. 
Governments should take steps, including through social dialogue, to ensure a fair 
transition for workers as AI is deployed, such as through training programmes along the 
working life, support for those affected by displacement, and access to new opportunities 
in the labour market. 

90. 
Governments  should  also  work  closely  with  stakeholders  to  promote  the 
responsible use of AI at work, to enhance the safety of workers and the quality of jobs, to 
foster entrepreneurship and productivity, and aim to ensure that the benefits from AI are 
broadly and fairly shared. 

2.5. International co-operation for trustworthy AI 

91. 
Governments,  including  developing  countries  and  with  stakeholders,  should 
actively co-operate to advance these principles and to progress on responsible stewardship 
of trustworthy AI. 

92. 
Governments should work together in the OECD and other global and regional fora 
to foster the sharing of AI knowledge, as appropriate. They should encourage international, 
cross-sectoral and open multi-stakeholder initiatives to garner long-term expertise on AI. 

Governments  should  promote  the  development  of  multi-stakeholder,  consensus-

93. 
driven global technical standards for interoperable and trustworthy AI.  

94. 
Governments  should  also  encourage  the  development,  and  their  own  use,  of 
internationally comparable metrics to measure AI research, development and deployment, 
and gather the evidence base to assess progress in the implementation of these principles. 

 
 
 
