FOREWORD 

O 

ver  the  course  of  thousand-year  history,  Vietnamese  people  have 

attached  great  importance  to  preserving  internal  stability  together 

with promoting friendship with other nations for national construction and 

development. Whenever facing foreign invasions, the whole nation rises up 

against the aggressors to protect their territorial sovereignty, independence 

and freedom. Inheriting and bringing into  full play the glorious tradition, 

under  the  leadership  of  the  Communist  Party  of  Viet  Nam  (CPV)  and 

management of the State, Vietnamese people, with the Viet Nam People's 

Army  (VPA)  at  the  core,  have  built  a  strong  all-people  national  defence, 

promoting  international  defence  integration  aimed  at  preventing  the 

danger  of  war  and  safeguarding  the  Homeland  from  afar,  protecting 

sustainable  peace  and  realising  the  goal  of  a  prosperous  people  and  a 

strong,  democratic,  equitable  and  advanced  country  while  maintaining  a 

sufficient defence capability to fight and win any forms of aggressive war. 

The VPA has been undergoing reforms, restructuring its organisation, 

upgrading  weapons  and  equipment,  tapping  its  military  art  for  an 

enhanced overall power and a higher combat readiness, truly meeting its 

mandate  as  an  army  of  the  people,  a  political  force,  a  loyal  and  reliable 

fighting  force  of  the  CPV,  State  and  people,  and  the  determinant  of 

Homeland protection in the new situation. 

In the coming years, the world, region, and country are to continue 

witnessing  unforeseeable  and  complex  developments.  Many  new 

destabilising  factors  arising  in  the  political,  security,  and  economic 

environment  will  have  rapid,  strong  and  sudden  impacts.  National 

defence  and  construction,  besides  presenting  many  opportunities  and 

advantages,  are  also  placed  before  a  myriad  of  difficulties  and 

challenges.  Defined  by  this  context,  Viet  Nam's  National  Defence 

6 

     2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE 

Strategy is set to closely  attach national peace and interests to regional 

and  global  peace,  security,  and  stability.  In  addition  to  the  goals  of 

firmly  protecting  independence,  sovereignty,  territorial  unity  and 

integrity, peace, national interests, the CPV, the State, and people, Viet 

Nam  actively  and  proactively  participates  in  preserving  peace  and 

stability in the region and the world. 

After the 2009 National Defence White Paper, Viet Nam releases 

the  2019  National  Defence  White  Paper  to  continually  affirm  and 

elucidate  the  fundamental  nature  of  peace  and  self-defence  of  Viet 

Nam's  national  defence.  It  also  specifies  challenges  of  Viet  Nam's 

national  defence  and  adjustments  to  its  national  defence  policy  and 

defence  leadership  and  management  mechanisms,  structure  of  the 

Ministry of National Defence, force structure and future directions for 

the  development  of  the  VPA  and  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  as 

well as the build-up of defence capability while making it transparent 

as part of Viet Nam's national defence policy and capability. 

The 2019  Viet  Nam  National  Defence  White Paper seeks  to  promote 

better understanding and confidence building between Viet Nam and other 

countries in the international community. It is an important document to 

raise Vietnamese citizens' awareness of national defence and facilitate better 

understanding among agencies, units, and social organisations about their 

rights  and  responsibilities  to  consolidate  national  defence  for  Homeland 

construction  and  protection,  for  the  sake  of  people's  happiness,  for  the 

peace, friendship, cooperation, and development of humankind. 

Minister of National Defence 

Socialist Republic of Viet Nam 

General Ngo Xuan Lich 

 
 
PART ONE 

STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND  
NATIONAL DEFENCE POLICY 

 
Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

9 

1. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 

1.1. The World and the Region   

Peace, national independence, democracy, cooperation, and 
development remain major trends in the world. These are also 
international  community. 
the 
aspirations  and  goals  of 
However, since the early 21st century, global politics, economy, 
and  security  have  been  characterised  by  unforeseeable  and 
complex  developments.  Incidents  of  national  sovereignty 
violations,  disputes  over  territories  and  resources,  ethnic  and 
religious  conflicts,  subversive  interference,  terrorism,  local 
wars, cyberwarfare, and non-traditional security challenges are 
found in many regions with emerging charateristics. 

The  global  situation  is  evolving  more  rapidly  in  a 
multipolar, multi-centre direction. Countries around the world, 
especially the major powers, adjust strategies to prioritise their 
interests  above  all  values.  Force  mobilisation, 
national 
alignment,  and  competition  for  interests  among  countries 
become  more  intense,  which  entails  both  opportunities  and 
challenges,  especially  for  small  and  medium-sized  countries. 
Manifestations  of  extreme  nationalism,  power  politics, 
pragmatism, and protectionism are on the rise in international 
relations. 

Globalisation,  international  integration,  cooperation, 
interdependence  among  countries, 

competition,  and 

 
10 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

particularly between major powers, are on the increase. Global 
security issues, ranging from finance, energy, water and food to 
climate change, natural calamities, and epidemics are unfolding 
with complicated developments. The international community 
has to struggle against traditional and non-traditional security 
challenges,  especially  international  terrorism,  cyber  security, 
and emerging forms of war. 

The  global  economy  is  likely  to  confront  new  difficulties 
and  challenges.  Competition  for  economy,  trade,  resources, 
markets,  technologies,  and  high-quality  human  resources 
becomes  increasingly  fiercer.  Financial,  monetary  instability 
and public debts continue to have adverse effects on the global 
economy.  The  economic  power  parity  among  countries  and 
regions is shifting dramatically. Most countries in the world are 
undergoing economic restructure and harnessing scientific and 
technological  advances  for  production.  Additionally,  many 
new  economic  models,  regional  and  international  financial 
institutions  and  new-generation  bilateral  and  multilateral  free 
trade agreements come into being. 

The  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  is  exerting  dramatic 
impacts on all aspects of social life on a global scale. The advent 
of modern weapons and equipment has basically transformed 
military  organisations  and  ways  of  warfighting.  Cyberspace 
has become the fifth operational domain, along with land, air, 
sea,  and  space,  profoundly  affecting  national  defence  and 
security  of  individual  countries,  the  region  and  the  world  at 
large. 

Asia-Pacific,  including  Southeast  Asia,  continues  to  be  a 
centre for dynamic development and occupies an increasingly 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

11 

influence 

important geo-economic, geo-political, and geo-strategic location. 
Recently, the Asia-Pacific region has witnessed drastic changes 
characterised  by  dialogues  for  peace,  exerting  a  positive 
influence  on  stability  and  development  in  the  region.  Some 
new  initiatives  such  as  the  "Free  and  Open  Indo-Pacific 
Strategy",  "Belt  and  Road  Initiative",  and  "Act  East  Policy" 
capture the attention of many countries. Against this backdrop, 
the  region  still  remains  the  ground  for  major  powers'  rivalry 
and 
intensification,  harbouring  destabilising 
elements,  traditionally  and  non-traditionally  alike.  Disputes 
over territorial sovereignty are likely to become more complex, 
potentially  leading  to  conflicts,  threatening  regional  stability, 
peace,  and  prosperity,  and  triggering  a  regional  arms  race. 
Non-traditional  security 
in  cyberspace, 
terrorism,  energy,  food,  climate  change,  natural  disasters, 
epidemics,  drug 
illegal 
trafficking,  people 
migration, transnational crime, and maritime piracy, are posing 
acute  challenges  to  peace,  security,  stability,  and  cooperation 
for development in the region. 

issues,  as  seen 

smuggling, 

The  Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations  (ASEAN)  has 
proved  its  vital  role  in  promoting  economic  growth,  social 
progress,  cultural  development,  mutual  understanding  and 
trust.  It  has  secured  an  increasingly  comprehensive  and  close 
cooperation  on  the  basis  of  the  ASEAN  Charter,  which 
emphasises  the  principles  of  dialogue,  consensus,  and  non-
interference  in  the  internal  affairs  and  assurance  of  peace, 
security, cooperation, and development in Southeast Asia and 
Asia-Pacific.  As  its  prestige  grows,  ASEAN  has  become  an 
important  partner  of  many  countries  in  the  world,  further 

12 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

affirming  its  central  role  in  the  Asia-Pacific  security 
architecture, in  which the ASEAN  Defence  Ministers'  Meeting 
(ADMM)  and  the  ASEAN  Defence  Ministers'  Meeting-Plus 
(ADMM-Plus)  serve  as  the  two  important  and  practical 
cooperation mechanisms. 

ASEAN 

is  playing  an 

increasingly  essential  role 

in 
maintaining peace, stability, maritime security and safety, and 
freedom  of  navigation  and  overflight  in  the  East  Sea  (also 
known  as  the  South  China  Sea).  It  is  committed  to  a  full  and 
effective implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of 
Parties in the South China Sea (DOC). ASEAN and China have 
adopted  a  framework  for  a  Code  of  Conduct  (COC)  in  the 
South  China  Sea  and  are  actively  working  on  COC  contents 
with  a  view  to  institutionalising  commitments  of  parties  to 
peace and stability in the East Sea, facilitating the management 
and resolution of disputes through peaceful means on the basis 
of  international  law,  including  the  1982  United  Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982 UNCLOS), advocating 
non-militarisation, and opposing the threat or use of force. 

1.2. Viet Nam 

Viet Nam is situated in an important geo-strategic location 
in the region and the world, serving as a bridge between Asia 
and  Southeast  Asia.  Viet  Nam  straddles  vital  sea  lines  of 
communication  (SLOCs)  connecting  the  Pacific  Ocean  and 
Indian Ocean, and is a gateway to trade for regional and global 
economies. 

Over  30  years  of  renovation  (doi  moi)  and  international 
integration,  Viet  Nam  has  recorded  great  achievements  of 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

13 

historic importance. As a result, its position, force, and overall 
power  have  been  enhanced.  Foreign  relations  are  increasingly 
broadened and deepened. Viet Nam's international prestige has 
been  heightened,  creating  fundamental  premises  for  national 
defence and construction. 

Viet  Nam  has  successfully  attained  its  socio-economic 
development  goals,  striving  to  become  a  middle-income 
country with a vibrant economy, macroeconomic stability, and 
developed  socialist-oriented  market  economic  institutions. 
Many  important  cultural  and  social  achievements  have  been 
recorded. Political and social stability is maintained while social 
security  and  people's  lives  are  greatly  improved.  Democracy, 
human rights, and freedom of belief and religion are respected. 
The great national unity is ceaselessly strengthened. 

The  all-people  national  defence  and  people's  security 
continue  to  be  enhanced  in  all  fields.  The  VPA  is  built  to 
become a revolutionary, regular, highly-skilled, and gradually 
modernised  force  with  some  services  and  arms  advancing 
straight  to  modernity.  The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  is 
built  in  the  direction  of  “robustness  and  extensiveness”. 
Together with the VPA, it is able to meet the increasingly high 
demands of national defence and construction, contributing to 
the maintenance of peace in the region and the world. 

Viet Nam actively and proactively integrates into the world 
with a deeper and wider engagement, considering this a crucial 
factor to establish a peaceful and stable environment conducive 
to  its  development.  Cooperative  relations  between  Viet  Nam 
and  its  neighbouring  countries,  regional  countries,  major 
powers,  and  traditional  partners  continue  to  be  solidified, 

14 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

developed, and broadened1. Viet Nam has established defence 
ties with various countries and international organisations2. 

Viet Nam advocates strengthening and deepening relations 

with partners, especially those of strategic importance. It seeks 

to  concretise  and  bring  established  relations  into  depth  and 

substance to intertwine interests between Viet Nam and other 

countries. 

Viet  Nam  actively  contributes  its  effort  to  resolving 
global  issues  with  the  international  community.  Viet  Nam 
successfully fulfilled its role as a non-permanent member of the 
UN  Security  Council  in  the  2008-2009  term  and  will  continue 
this  role  for  the  2020-2021  term.  It  also  takes  part  in  United 
is  a 
Nations  (UN)  peacekeeping  operations.  Viet  Nam 
prestigious,  responsible  member  of  regional 
institutions, 
effectively  contributing  to  the  building  of  a  strong,  united, 
cooperative,  and  resilient  ASEAN  Community.  It  seeks  to 
ceaselessly  broaden,  deepen,  and  improve  the  effectiveness  of 
external  relations  of  the  CPV,  State's  diplomacy,  and  people's 
external  relations.  The  aforementioned  achievements  have 
demonstrated Viet Nam's foreign policy of independence, self-
reliance,  peace,  cooperation,  development,  diversification  and 

__________ 

1.  Viet  Nam  has  established  strategic  partnerships  with  16  countries, 

comprehensive  partnerships  with  11  countries,  and  special  strategic 

relationships with Laos and Cambodia. 

2.  Viet  Nam  has  established  defence  ties  with  over  80  countries  and 

international  organisations.  It  has  also  set  up  defence  attaché  offices  in  37 

countries  and  to  the  United  Nations  by  2019.  Forty  nine  countries  have  set 

up their defence, military attaché offices in Viet Nam. 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

15 

multilateralisation of international relations, and proactive and 
active  integration  into  the  world  in  an  endeavour  to  firmly 
maintain  an  environment  conducive  to  national  construction 
and development and heighten prestige and status of Viet Nam 
in the international arena1.  

Viet  Nam's  government  and  people  have  invested  a  great 
deal  of  effort  in  cooperating  with  countries  and  international 
organisations  in  order  to  overcome  the  aftermath  of  war, 
including  issues  of  unexploded  bombs,  mines,  ordnance,  and 
toxic  chemicals  with  the  aim  of  providing  relief  to  victims  of 
war,  contributing  to  protecting  the  environment  and  people's 
health  and  ensuring  safety  for  socio-economic  development. 
Viet  Nam  has  also  actively  participated  in  joint  training 
exercises  on  Humanitarian  Assistance  and  Disaster  Relief 
(HADR),  Search  and  Rescue  (SAR),  effectively  handling  non-
traditional security situations.  

Viet Nam has proactively and actively promoted talks and 
negotiations  with  its  neighbouring  countries  to  settle  disputes 
and  issues  regarding  the  delimitation  of  national  land  and 
maritime  boundaries.  So  far,  Viet  Nam  has  mostly  completed 
land  border  demarcation  and  border  marker  planting  with  its 
neighbouring  countries,  working  towards  a  complete  legal 
system governing the building, management, and protection of 
national borders. 

Viet  Nam  and  China  have  accomplished  land  border 
demarcation  and  border  marker  planting  in  the  field.  Both 
countries  are  committed  to  strictly  implementing  legal 

__________ 

1.  Communist  Party  of  Viet  Nam,  Documents  of  the  XIIth  Party  Congress, 

National Political Publishing House, Ha Noi, 2016, p. 313. 

16 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

documents  governing  land  borders  and  augmenting  security 
and  safety  control  in  border  areas,  which  serves  to  build  a 
shared land border of peace, friendship, and long-term stability 
conducive  to  socio-economic  development,  national  defence, 
security, cultural and social interaction, etc., in the border areas 
between  the  two  countries.  Viet  Nam  and  China  have  signed 
the Agreement on Maritime Boundary Delimitation in the Gulf 
of  Tonkin,  the  Agreement  on  Fishery  Cooperation  in  the  Gulf 
of Tonkin, and the Agreement on the Basic Principles Guiding 
the Settlement of Sea-Related Issues between the two countries. 
These  lay  a  solid  foundation  for  promoting  cooperation  in 
protecting maritime environment and security. 

Divergences  between  Viet  Nam  and  China  regarding 
sovereignty  in  the  East  Sea  are  of  historical  existence,  which 
need  to  be  settled  with  precaution,  avoiding  negative  impacts 
on general peace, friendship, and cooperation for development 
between  the  two  countries.  The  resolution  of  disputes  in  the 
East  Sea  is  a  long-term,  difficult  and  complex  process, 
involving  multiple  countries  and  parties.  The  two  countries 
should continue negotiations and consultations to find peaceful 
solutions on the basis of international law. While waiting for a 
fundamental,  long-term  solution  to  the  East  Sea  issue,  Viet 
Nam  and  China  need  to  put  more  effort  into  maintaining 
stability  in  the  East  Sea,  complying  with  international  law, 
including  the  1982  UNCLOS  to  which  both  countries  are 
signatories,  seriously  implementing  the  DOC,  and  striving  to 
achieve  a  COC  between  ASEAN  and  China.  Viet  Nam  and 
China  are  committed  to  upholding  the  Agreement  on  the 
Basic Principles Guiding the Settlement of Sea-Related Issues 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

17 

between the two countries. Viet Nam supports and respects the 
right  of  innocent  passage  as  well  as  the  security  and  safety  of 
navigation and overflight on the East Sea, taking no actions that 
would complicate the situation or expand disputes, at the same 
time, avoiding militarisation, threat or use of force.   

Viet  Nam  and  Laos  have  completed  the  increase  and 
upgrade  of  border  markers  and  signed  the  Protocol  on  the 
Borderline  and  National  Border  Markers,  the  Agreement  on 
Regulations  of  Managing  the  Borderline  and  Border  Gates  on 
Land, and legal documents relating to the building of a shared 
land  border  of  peace,  friendship,  and  cooperation  between  the 
two  countries  to  create  favourable  conditions  for  border 
management  and  protection.  Both  sides  have  expanded 
cooperation in trade and tourism, investment, people-to-people 
interactions,  cultural  exchange,  and  national  defence  and 
security of each country. 

Viet  Nam  and  Cambodia  have  signed  the  Treaty  on  the 
Delimitation  of  National  Boundaries,  the  Supplementary 
Treaty  on  the  Delimitation  of  National  Boundaries,  and  the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  on  land  border 
in  remaining  areas1.  The  two  countries  are 
adjustment 
committed to putting more effort into the settlement of existing 
issues and accomplishment of demarcation and border marker 
planting on land, seriously implementing the 1982 Viet Nam - 
Cambodia  Agreement  on  Historic  Waters,  and  building  a 
shared border of peace, friendship, and cooperation for mutual 

__________ 

1.  As  of  October  2019,  Viet  Nam  and  Cambodia  have  demarcated 
around  1,045  km  of  the  border  line,  built  315  main  border  markers,  1,511 
auxiliary  border  markers,  and  221  border  posts,  accounting  for  84%  of 
workload. 

18 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

development,  which  satisfies  the  demands  for  sovereignty 
protection of each country. 

Viet  Nam  has  entered  into  negotiations  to  delimitate 
maritime  boundaries  with  relevant  ASEAN  Member  States, 
opening  up  new  cooperation  opportunities  for  development, 
environmental protection, security, and safety at sea. 

Beside  achievements,  Viet  Nam  still  faces  a  number  of 
difficulties and challenges. The economy is still at risk of lagging 
behind other countries and unsustainable development. Labour 
productivity,  quality,  effectiveness,  and  competitive  capacity 
remain  low  while  there  exist  many  limitations  in  scientific  and 
technological  achievements  and  qualified  human  resources. 
Protectionism,  economic  and  trade  competition  between  major 
powers,  and  the  reduced  role  of  multilateral  institutions  have 
multifaceted  effects  on  Viet  Nam's  economy.  The  Fourth 
Industrial  Revolution  gives  rise  to  new  requirements  for 
manufacturing, trade, and social security. 

National  defence  and  security  are  facing  many  challenges. 
The hostile forces who conspire with reactionaries and political 
opportunists  inside  the  country  have  not  given  up  their  plots 
against  the  Vietnamese  revolution.  They  focus  on  destroying 
political, ideological foundation with a view to eliminating the 
leading  role  of the CPV and the  socialist  regime in Viet  Nam, 
"depoliticising" the VPA, sowing division in the entire nation's 
great unity,  and driving a  wedge between  the people  and the 
CPV and the VPA. 

Despite some recent positive developments in the East Sea 
situation,  factors  that  potentially  cause  instability  and  tension 
still  exist  and  evolve  in  a  complex  manner.  This  reality  is 
posing  new  challenges  to  the  protection  of  sovereignty, 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

19 

territory, peace, and stability of Viet Nam. New developments 
in  the  East  Sea,  including  unilateral  actions,  power-based 
coercion, violations of international law, militarisation, change 
in  the  status  quo,  and  infringement  upon  Viet  Nam's 
sovereignty,  sovereign  rights,  and  jurisdiction  as  provided  in 
international  law,  have  undermined  the  interests  of  nations 
concerned  and  threatened  peace,  stability,  security,  safety, 
and  freedom  of  navigation  and  overflight  in  the  region. 
Additionally,  strategic  rivalries  between  major  powers  have 
become increasingly acute, sometimes turning the East Sea into 
a "flash point", potentially leading to conflict. 

The  hostile  forces  take  full  advantage  of  scientific 
and  technological  advances,  especially  information  and 
communications  technology,  to  stage  information  warfare 
the  Vietnamese  revolution. 
and  cyberwarfare  against 
Gathering  of  national  secrets  and  intelligence,  disinformation, 
and  cyber  attacks  have  seriously  threatened  national 
sovereignty  in  cyberspace,  intensely  affecting  the  political 
stability, socio-economic development, national defence and 
security of Viet Nam. 

Non-traditional  security  issues  such  as  terrorism,  arms 
trafficking,  drug  trafficking,  maritime  piracy,  transnational 
organised  crime,  illegal  migration,  environmental  disasters, 
climate  change,  epidemics,  natural  disasters,  among  others, 
also  pose  perpetual  challenges  to  the  national  defence  and 
security  of  Viet  Nam.  Shifts  in  water  currents  in  cross-border 
rivers,  which  are  triggered  by  humans,  also  have  adverse 
effects  on  Viet  Nam,  affecting  water,  food,  environmental 
security, and the lives of millions of people in various localities. 

20 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Viet  Nam  has  suffered  from  heavy  consequences  of  past 
wars.  Many  fallen  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  armed  forces 
have not yet been identified. Agent Orange/Dioxin has caused 
long-lasting health effects to millions of people, destroyed over 
half  of  the  natural  forest  area,  and  severely  contaminated  the 
environment  in  many  localities.  Thousands  of  Vietnamese 
people  have  been  facing  with  dangers  of  bombs,  mines,  and 
unexploded ordnance left over from the wars. 

2. NATIONAL DEFENCE POLICY 

2.1. Strategy to Safeguard the Homeland, Viet Nam's 

National Defence Strategy, Viet Nam's Military Strategy 

The  Strategy  to  Safeguard  the  Homeland  is  a  national 
stratagem  to  identify  goals,  assemble  forces,  and  consider 
feasible  solutions  to  generate  overall  power  to  firmly  defend 
the Homeland. It is an overarching national strategy that plays 
a decisive role and provides a solid foundation for conducting 
research  and  planning  of  national  defence  strategy,  military 
strategy,  national  security  strategy,  diplomatic  strategy,  and 
other sectorial strategies. 

The  Strategy  to  Safeguard  the  Homeland  aims  to  firmly 
defend  independence,  sovereignty,  territorial  unity  and 
integrity,  protect  the  Party,  State,  people,  and  the  cause  of 
renovation,  industrialisation,  and  modernisation,  safeguard 
national  interests,  ensure  political  security,  social  order  and 
safety,  and  culture,  and  maintain  political  stability  and  a 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

21 

peaceful environment for socialist-oriented national construction 
and development. 

The  Strategy  to  Safeguard  the  Homeland  enunciates  the 
following  views:  to  secure  the  leading  role  of  the  CPV,  to 
promote the effectiveness of state management in the cause of 
Homeland  protection;  to  determinedly  uphold  the  goal  of 
national  independence  and  socialism,  maintaining  a  peaceful, 
stable  environment  for  socio-economic  development  of  the 
country; to  closely combine  the two  strategic  tasks of national 
defence  and  construction;  to  take  internal  strength  as  the 
decisive  factor,  economic  development  as  the  centre,  Party-
building  as  the  key,  culture  as  the  spiritual  foundation  of  the 
society,  and  strengthening  of  national  defence  and  security  as 
the crucial and regular task; to build overall power in politics, 
ideology, economy, culture, society, national defence, security, 
and  diplomacy;  to  pursue  the  line  of  independence  and 
self-reliance  while  proactively  and  actively  integrating 
into  the  world;  and  to  consistently  implement  a  foreign 
policy of openness, multilateralisation and diversification of 
international relations1. 

Viet  Nam's  National  Defence  Strategy  is  a  national 
defensive  strategy  to  protect  the  country  from  afar  and  to 
prepare  to  win  wars  of  foreign  invasion.  The  strategy  is 
peaceful  and  self-defensive  in  nature  expressed  by  the 
guideline  of  combining  overall  national  power  with  power  of 
the times. It takes sound political guidelines as decisive factors, 

__________ 

1.  See  Communist  Party  of  Viet  Nam,  Documents  of  the  XIIth  Party 

Congress, Ibid. 

22 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

national defence power as the key, military power as the core, 
directly  originating  from  combat  power  of  the  armed  forces 
with  the  VPA  playing  the  central  role.  Viet  Nam's  National 
Defence  Strategy  seeks  to  establish  and  strengthen  relations 
and  strategic  trust  with  countries,  particularly  strategic 
partners, with a view to forming the position for safeguarding 
the Homeland and being ready to defeat any forms of wars of 
foreign invasion should they occur. 

Viet  Nam's  National  Defence  Strategy  is  the  backbone, 
realising  the  Strategy  to  Safeguard  the  Homeland  in  the  new 
situation aimed at firmly defending independence, sovereignty, 
territorial  unity  and  integrity  of  the  country,  safeguarding 
national  interests  both  inside  and  outside  the  territory, 
preserving  sustainable  peace  of  the  country,  protecting  the 
the 
Party,  State,  and  people,  actively  contributing 
maintenance of peace and stability in the region and the world, 
and securing political stability and a peaceful environment for 
national construction and development. 

to 

Viet  Nam's  Military  Strategy  is  a  key  component  of  Viet 
Nam's National Defence Strategy and the art of employing the 
State's  military  might  to  defend  the  Homeland.  It  serves  to 
proactively  prevent  and  repulse  enemies'  forms  of  war  and 
facilitates the conduct of the comprehensive, all-people war to 
be  ready  to  win  in  all  operational  environments  and  critical 
areas. The strategy requires close combination between military 
struggle  and  struggle  in  politics,  economy,  society,  security, 
and  diplomacy,  between  fighting  and  strengthening  of  forces 
and  constructing  the  country.  It  promotes  self-reliance, 
resilience, and mobilisation of the entire nation's overall power 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

23 

in  association  with  international  support  and  assistance  in 
order  to  break  the  enemies'  invasive  ambitions,  to  end  wars 
under favourable conditions, and to reconstruct the country. 

Viet Nam's Military Strategy aims to win wars to safeguard 
the Homeland and to sustainably build the all-people national 
defence  force  and  posture  in  combination  with  the  people's 
security force and posture in peacetime, satisfying the demands 
for  national  defence  and  mobilisation  of  the  overall  power  of 
the people's war to win any forms of war if they are to occur. 

2.2. Viet Nam's National Defence Policy 

Viet Nam builds its national defence power on the basis of 
the overall strength of the whole nation, of the great solidarity 
of  the  masses,  and  of  the  whole  political  system  under  the 
leadership of the CPV and the unified management of the State 
of  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam,  consolidating  and 
strengthening the great national unity. 

Viet  Nam's  national  defence  policy  is  peaceful  and  self-
defensive  in  nature.  Viet  Nam  resolutely  and  consistently 
settles all disputes and divergences through peaceful means on 
the basis of international law, actively and proactively prevents 
and  repulses  the  risks  of  war,  realises  the  motto  of  defending 
the Homeland from afar, and is prepared to fight against wars 
of aggression. 

Viet  Nam  consistently  advocates  neither 

joining  any 
military  alliances,  siding  with  one  country  against  another, 
giving any other countries permission to set up military bases 
or use its territory to carry out military activities against other 
countries  nor  using  force  or  threatening  to  use  force  in 

24 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

international  relations.  Viet  Nam  also  promotes  defence 
cooperation with countries to improve its capabilities to protect 
the  country  and  address  common  security  challenges. 
Depending on circumstances and specific conditions, Viet Nam 
will  consider  developing  necessary,  appropriate  defence  and 
military relations with other countries on the basis of respecting 
each  other's  independence,  sovereignty,  territorial  unity  and 
integrity as well as fundamental principles of international law, 
cooperation  for  mutual  benefits  and  common  interests  of  the 
region and international community. 

Viet Nam is consistent in its strategic goals and principles, 
applies stratagems in a flexible manner, and actively defeats the 
hostile forces' schemes and responds to complex developments 
of  the  situation.  Those  who  respect 
independence  and 
sovereignty, establish and promote friendly relations, and work 
together on an equal footing for mutual benefit with Viet Nam 
are its partners. Any forces who hatch plots and do deliberate 
damage  to  Viet  Nam's  goals  of  national  defence  and 
construction,  attempt  to  overthrow  the  socialist  regime,  and 
infringe  upon  the  independence,  sovereignty,  and  national 
interests of Viet Nam are its objects of struggle.  

Viet Nam opposes arms races and at the same time seeks to 
make  the  VPA  strong  in  politics,  ideology  and  organisation, 
absolutely  loyal  to  the  Party,  the  Homeland  and  people,  with 
an integrated strength and increased combat power, an adept, 
compact,  strong,  mobile,  highly  flexible  and  efficient,  and 
synchronous  organisational  structure,  which  could  be 
adequately adjusted and developed in terms of force posture so 
as  to  ensure  its  readiness  to  meet  the  demands  of  combat 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

25 

missions.  Viet  Nam  is  determined  to  build  the  Reserve,  the 
Militia and Self-Defence Force, which  are robust, extensive, of 
high  quality,  expedient,  effective  and  suitable  for 
local 
conditions and forms of socio-economic organisations. 

As  a  responsible  member  of  the  international  community, 
Viet  Nam  is  keen  on  fulfilling  its  duties  while  actively 
cooperating  with  other  nations  to  address  emerging  security 
issues,  contributing  to  the  protection  of  peace  and  stability  in 
the region and the world. Viet Nam appreciates the role of the 
UN in peacekeeping operations and prevention of conflict and 
war.  Viet  Nam  upholds  standards  and  norms  of  international 
relations set forth in the Charter of the United Nations. 

Prompted  by  the  policy  of  proactively  supporting  and 
contributing  to  the  common  efforts  of  the  international 
community for peace, security, and disarmament, Viet Nam is 
committed to seriously fulfilling obligations of a member state 
of  conventions,  agreements,  protocols  on  non-proliferation  of 
weapons  of  mass  destruction  (WMD),  the  Treaty  on  the 
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapons-Free Zone (SEANWFZ), and 
other  international  conventions  on  disarmament.  It  is  actively 
considering  and  making  necessary  preparations  for  further 
participating  in  international  conventions  and  treaties  on 
national defence and security. Viet Nam welcomes initiatives to 
prevent development, manufacture, storage, and use of WMD. 
Viet Nam prioritises its defence cooperation with countries 
in  the  region  and  the  world  in  dealing  with  non-traditional 
security issues, thereby broadening and improving the quality 
of  cooperation,  bilaterally  and  multilaterally,  effectively 
preventing  and  responding  to  non-traditional  security 
challenges, and overcoming the aftermath of wars. 

26 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

2.3. International Integration and Defence Diplomacy 

Implementing  the  International  Integration  and  Defence 

Diplomacy  Strategy  under  the  guidance  of  the  CPV  is  an 

important mission and a stratagem to defend the country from 

afar  by  peaceful  means.  It  also  serves  to  establish  and 

consolidate conviction in the protection of national interests, to 

ensure  equality  and  mutual  benefits,  to  preserve  a  peaceful, 

stable  environment for national development, and  to  combine 

national power with power of the times to generate aggregated 

strength,  improve  the  country's  international  status,  and 

solidify its independence and self-reliance. 

Viet Nam accelerates international integration and defence 

diplomacy under the motto "activeness, proactiveness, solidity, 

flexibility, effectiveness" with the aim of bringing into full play 

its  overall  power,  preserving  a  peaceful,  stable  environment, 

and  making  the  most  of  international  support  and  assistance. 

Besides, it strives to promote strategic trust, maintain a peaceful 

environment  and  cooperation  for  mutual  development,  and 

strengthen  the  national  defence  and  security  postures  for 

national defence and construction. This is a process of struggle 

along with cooperation, in which cooperation is prioritised on 

the  basis  of  firmly  safeguarding  territorial  sovereignty, 

independence,  self-determination,  self-reliance,  and  national 

interests. 

Viet  Nam  advocates  developing  defence  relations  with  all 
nations,  especially  its  neighbouring  ones,  strategic  partners, 
comprehensive  partners,  building  confidence,  and  garnering 
international  support  and  assistance  to  preclude  and  respond 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

27 

to  the  risk  of  wars  of  aggression.  It  is  willing  to  help  other 
countries when requested within its capacity on the basis of its 
Constitution,  law,  and  national  interests  and  in  accordance 
with the UN Charter and international law. Viet Nam is ready 
to  expand  defence  relations  and  cooperation  regardless  of 
differences in political regimes and levels of development. Viet 
Nam  does  not  accept  defence  cooperation  relations  under 
pressure or any coercive conditions. 

Viet Nam promotes multilateral defence cooperation with 
a view to contributing to ensuring national defence, security, 
and  national  sovereignty.  Viet  Nam  actively  and  proactively 
joins  hands  with  ASEAN  Member  States  to  build  a  strong 
ASEAN  Community, 
implements  the  ASEAN  Political-
Security  Community  Blueprint  2025  effectively,  takes  part  in 
establishing and implementing ASEAN's norms and principles, 
proposes  initiatives  aimed  at  maintaining  regional  peace  and 
stability,  and  participates  in  and  contributes  to  shaping 
multilateral  security  and  defence  mechanisms  to  which  it  is  a 
member,  first  and  foremost  ASEAN-led  mechanisms  such  as 
ADMM, ADMM-Plus, and ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). 

Viet Nam continues to make substantive contributions and 
broadens  its  participation  in  UN  peacekeeping  operations1.  It 
also  continues  to  participate  in  joint  training  exercises  on 
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR), Search 

__________ 

1. By 2019, Viet Nam has sent 37 officers to UN peacekeeping missions 
in the Central African Republic and South Sudan and deployed two Level-2 
Field  Hospitals  (63  personnel  each)  to  the  missions  in  South  Sudan.  It  is 
actively  preparing  an  Engineering  Company  for  deployment  to  UN 
peacekeeping missions. 

28 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

and  Rescue  (SAR),  cooperates  with  other  countries  and 
international organisations in overcoming the consequences of 
wars,  and actively  contributes its effort to  non-proliferation of 
WMD.  In  addition,  Viet  Nam  considers  participating  in  other 
multilateral  security  and  defence  cooperation  mechanisms  and 
international 
for 
independence,  sovereignty,  territorial  integrity,  and  non-
interference in the internal affairs of other countries. 

the  basis  of  respect 

legal  bodies  on 

Cooperation  in  border  protection  and  border  friendship 
exchange  is  one  of  the  priorities  of  Viet  Nam's  defence 
diplomacy.  Viet  Nam  advocates  increasing  joint  patrols  and 
experience  exchange  activities  with  its  bordering  countries  on 
the issues of national border management  and protection, and 
counterterrorism,  transnational  crime,  illegal  migration  and 
immigration,  search  and  rescue,  and  disaster  relief  in  border 
areas.  Viet  Nam  strictly  implements  agreements  signed  with 
other  countries,  promotes  the  establishment  and  maintenance 
of  hotlines  between  Viet  Nam's  Ministry  of  National  Defence 
and  those  of  other  countries,  and  strengthens  cooperative 
relations  with  other  navies  and  maritime  law  enforcement 
forces  with  the  aim  of  enhancing  confidence  building, 
preventing  conflicts,  and  dealing  with  common  security 
challenges.  Viet  Nam  is  willing  to  welcome  vessels  of  navies, 
coast guards, border guards, and international organisations to 
make courtesy or ordinary port visits or stop over in its ports to 
repair,  replenish  logistic  and  technical  supplies  or  take  refuge 
from natural disasters. 

Viet  Nam  welcomes  cooperation  with  other  countries  and 
international organisations in experience sharing and provision 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

29 

of resources  that help Viet  Nam to deal  with the  aftermath of 
wars.  This  effort  should  concentrate  on  assisting  victims  of 
Agent  Orange/Dioxin,  treating  land  and  waters  contaminated 
by  chemicals,  bombs  and  mines,  and  resolving  the  issue  of 
military personnel still listed as missing in action. 

Viet  Nam  is  ready  to  participate  in  security  and  defence 
its  capabilities  and 
cooperation  mechanisms  suitable  to 
interests,  including  security  and  defence  mechanisms  in  the 
Indo-Pacific  region  as  well  as  those  of  the  European  Union 
and  the  United  Nations.  Viet  Nam  advocates  expanding 
cooperation between ASEAN with external partners within the 
ASEAN-led  multilateral  security  mechanisms  on  the  basis  of 
respecting  fundamental  principles,  standards  and  norms  of 
ASEAN. 

2.4. National Defence Struggle 

Viet  Nam  respects  other  countries'  independence, 
sovereignty,  territorial  unity  and  integrity,  and  national 
interests  as  provided  in  international  law.  At  the  same  time, 
Viet  Nam  demands  that 
independence,  sovereignty, 
its 
territorial  unity  and  integrity,  Constitution,  and  law  must  be 
respected by other countries. 

Viet Nam resolutely and consistently struggles to settle all 
disputes  and  differences  through  peaceful  means  on  the  basis 
of international law and practices. Viet Nam is to resort to any 
necessary  measures  to  defend  its  sovereignty,  territory,  and 
national interests when they are encroached upon. 

Viet  Nam  advocates  building  the  all-people  national 
defence posture in close combination with the people's security 

30 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

posture, bringing into full play the overall power of the whole 
people and political system, in which the armed forces play the 
key  role  in  national  defence  struggle,  including  unarmed  and 
armed  struggle,  combining  military  struggle  with  struggle  in 
politics, diplomacy, economy, and culture, not allowing foreign 
countries  to  exploit  and  bargain  with  each  other  or  with  the 
hostile  forces  to  compromise  Viet  Nam's  independence, 
sovereignty,  and  national  interests,  and  responding  flexibly 
and effectively to specific situations. 

Actively  and  proactively  preventing  and  repulsing  the 
danger  of  wars  are  among  essential  tasks  of  Viet  Nam’s 
national  defence  in  peacetime  in  order  to  implement  the 
national  defence  strategy  to  its  optimal  effectiveness  which 
necessitates  the  protection  of  national  sovereignty,  territorial 
interests  without  resorting  to 
unity  and 
warfighting. National defence is implemented through a wide 
variety  of  political,  economic,  diplomatic,  sociocultural  and 
military  activities  according  to  a  unified  strategy  in  order  to 
eliminate factors leading to armed conflict and war, at the same 
time  preparing  every  aspect  carefully  and  synchronously  in 
peacetime so as to win any forms of aggressive war. 

integrity,  and 

Borders  of  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  are  sacred 
and inviolable. Protection of borders means  firm protection of 
independence,  sovereignty,  and  territorial  integrity  of  the 
country.  It  also  encompasses  protecting  the  solemnity  and 
national symbols at the borders and border gates, and securing 
national  interests,  natural  resources,  ecological  environment, 
and political security. Protection of borders means preservation 
of social order and safety and firm defence of border areas. 

Part one: STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL DEFENCE...   

31 

Viet  Nam  has  sufficient  historical  evidence  and  legal 
foundation to prove its undeniable sovereignty over the Paracel 
and  the  Spratly  Islands  and  sovereign  rights  in  the  Exclusive 
Economic  Zone  (EEZ)  and  continental  shelf  in  the  East  Sea. 
Viet  Nam  resolutely  and  consistently  protects  sovereignty, 
sovereign rights, and jurisdiction over its waters as provided in 
international  law.  Viet  Nam  upholds  the  "Agreement  on  the 
Basic  Principles  Guiding  the  Settlement  of  Sea-Related  Issues" 
between  Viet  Nam  and  China.  It  continues  to  implement  the 
DOC comprehensively and effectively. Viet Nam and ASEAN 
strive for an early conclusion of the COC with China. Viet Nam 
appeals to the parties concerned to keep disputes under control 
and  take  no  actions  that  complicate  the  situation  or  expand 
disputes so as to preserve peace and stability in the East Sea. 

Viet  Nam  and  Cambodia  continue  to  negotiate  for  the 
resolution  of  issues  with  regard  to  land  and  maritime 
boundaries  in  the  spirit  of  friendship,  cooperation,  and  strict 
in  conformity  with 
compliance  with  commitments  and 
international  law  and  practices.  Viet  Nam  opposes  acts  of 
interference and division of the bilateral relationship. While the 
sea border between the two countries has not been delimitated, 
Viet  Nam  strictly  observes  the  1982  Viet  Nam-Cambodia 
Agreement on Historic Waters. It also enhances cooperation in 
the  management,  protection,  and  preservation  of  security  and 
order in land and sea border areas. 

As  a  maritime  nation,  Viet  Nam  always  pays  special 
attention  to  maritime  security,  ensuring  that  Viet  Nam's  seas 
are  safe,  friendly,  and  strictly  controlled.  Viet  Nam  always 
observes  international  law  and  supports  the  protection  of 

32 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

free trade, freedom of navigation and overflight, and peaceful 
economic activities at sea. 

Viet Nam opposes any acts that violate its sovereignty and 
national interests in cyberspace, or abuse cyberspace to spread 
distorted  information  to  divide  the  great  national  unity.  Viet 
Nam  is  ready  to  use  all  measures  conforming  to  international 
law to deter and prevent cyber sabotage in order to safeguard 
its sovereignty and national interests in cyberspace. 

Viet  Nam promotes  cooperation with countries inside and 
outside  the  region  to  address  common  security  challenges. 
Prevention and response to global climate change is one of Viet 
Nam's national strategic goals. Viet Nam prioritises the use of 
clean  energy,  reduction  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  and 
mitigation  of  sea-level  rise  impacts.  Additionally,  it  endorses 
efforts  of  the  Mekong  River  Commission  and  effective 
management and use of Mekong's water resources according to 
the  rules  of  international  law  that  govern  interstate  relations 
over transboundary rivers. 

Viet  Nam  resolutely  condemns  and  opposes  acts  of 
terrorism, financing of terrorism, and terrorism sponsorship in 
all forms. It also opposes taking advantage of counterterrorism 
activities  to  intervene  in  other  countries'  internal  affairs.  Viet 
Nam  endorses  international  cooperative  efforts  in  preventing 
terrorism and terrorism sponsorship in all forms, which should 
be carried out in accordance with fundamental principles of the 
UN Charter  and international law as well  as the Constitution, 
law, and conditions of Viet Nam. 

 
PART TWO 

BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE  
NATIONAL DEFENCE 

 
 
Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

35 

A 

ll-people  national  defence,  being  the  national  defence 
power  of  the  country,  is  built  on  the  political,  spiritual, 
human, material, and financial foundations, characterised by the 
all-people  approach,  comprehensiveness,  independence,  self-
reliance,  resilience  and  progressive  modernity.  The  all-people 
national defence comprises the full spectrum of activities carried 
out by the CPV, State, and people, covering political, economic, 
diplomatic, military, cultural, and scientific aspects to generate a 
synchronous,  balanced  and  comprehensive  power  specified  by 
military  power  with  the  armed  forces  at  the  core,  serving  to 
prevent  and  push  back  the  risks  of  war  as  well  as  to  ensure 
victories 
firmly 
in  warfighting.  This  will  contribute 
safeguarding  independence,  sovereignty,  territorial  unity  and 
integrity,  and  sustainable  peace  of  the  country,  protecting  the 
CPV,  State,  people,  and  socialist  regime  in  the  new  situation. 
Building  the  all-people  national  defence  is  the  building  of 
national  defence  potential,  national  defence  forces,  and  all-
people national defence posture. 

to 

1. BUILDING NATIONAL DEFENCE POTENTIAL 

National  defence  potential  is  defined  as  the  human, 
material,  financial  and  spiritual  resources  that  can  be 
mobilised both  at home  and  abroad  to  accomplish national 
defence missions. 

 
 
 
 
 
36 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

1.1. Building Political Potential 

Political  potential  is  the  fundamental  component  of 
national  defence  potential,  measured  by  the  nature  and 
quality  of  human  resources,  historical  traditions,  national 
culture, and political system, manifested by the capability to 
turn politics into power to realise national defence missions. 
Building political potential determines the ability to mobilise 
other components of national defence potential.  

The  political  potential  is  found  in  awareness,  willpower, 
conviction,  psychology,  sentiments,  and  responsibilities  of 
the people and armed forces for national defence missions. It 
is the combination of national power and power of the times, 
the  fruit  of  a  long  process  under  the  CPV's  leadership,  and 
the  continuation  of  the  thousand-year  historic  traditions  of 
Vietnamese people in founding and defending the nation. 

Creatively  and  innovatively  applying  the  principle  of 
"men  before  arms",  which  considers  humans  the  centre  of 
national defence, Viet Nam attaches importance to developing 
high-quality  human  resources  imbued  with  patriotism, 
compassion  for  people,  knowledge,  political  consciousness 
and steadfastness, thought of revolutionary offensive, loyalty 
to  the  revolutionary  cause  of  the  CPV,  and  dedication  to 
national defence. 

Building  political  potential,  first  and  foremost,  requires 
building confidence and consensus of all strata of people about 
the leadership of the  CPV and  the  success  of national defence 
and  construction.  It  is  important  to  cultivate  revolutionary 
virtue,  patriotism,  and  national  pride  while  ceaselessly 
improving people's material and spiritual lives. 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

37 

Building political potential must ensure comprehensiveness 
that  includes  ideological  awareness,  psychology,  sentiments, 
belief,  and  political  attitude  and  responsibilities  to  the 
Homeland  and  people.  Building  political  potential  requires 
education  to  raise  national  defence  awareness  for  all  people, 
particularly  the  young  generation,  pupils,  and  students,  and 
foster  defence  and  security  knowledge  for  key  cadres  of  all 
levels and sectors. 

Political potential is built by means of making the CPV and 
the State pure and strong and consolidating the great national 
solidarity.  It  is  also  developed  through  the  implementation  of 
policies  on  religious  freedom  and  ethnic  equality  and  the 
practice  of  broad  democracy  under  the  motto  "the  people 
know,  the  people  discuss,  the  people  do,  and  the  people 
inspect".  It  is  important  to  resolutely  combat  corruption  and 
achieve  the  goals  of  a  prosperous  people  and  a  strong, 
democratic,  equitable  and  advanced  country.  Building 
political  potential  requires  Viet  Nam  to  ensure  social  security 
and enact preferential policies for socio-economic development, 
hunger  eradication,  and  poverty  reduction  in  hinterland, 
remote,  border,  sea,  and  island  areas,  with  an  aim  to  bring 
about  sustainable  development,  strengthening  political 
potential for the cause of national defence and construction. 

1.2. Building Economic and Sociocultural Potential 

Viet Nam intends to organise and expedite the building of a 
prosperous country in close combination with the building of a 
strong  all-people  national  defence  in  a  synchronous  and 
uniform  manner,  which  is  ensured  by  guidelines  and  policies 
and  enacted  by  specific  measures  from  the  Central  to  local 
governments.  Viet  Nam  has  plans  to  invest  in  sustaining  and 

38 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

enhancing  its  economic  autonomy  and  resiliency,  closely 
combining  socio-economic  and  cultural  development  with 
strengthening  national  defence  and  security,  adjusting  master 
plans  of  strategic  regions  in  alignment  with  national  defence 
and security,  meanwhile developing  maritime economy along 
with protecting sea and island sovereignty.   

Viet  Nam  is  determined  to  develop  socialist-oriented 
economic  potential  of  the  all-people  national  defence  and 
accelerate  industrialisation  and  modernisation  of  the  country. 
Viet  Nam  seeks  to  maintain  independence  and  self-reliance 
while broadening economic cooperation. It advocates sustainable, 
rapid  economic  development  and  higher  national  reserves. 
Economic  development  is  associated  with  ensuring  social 
progress  and  justice  and  improving  quality  of  education  and 
training  and  human  resources,  which  are  made  ready  for 
mobilisation  for  national  defence.  Viet  Nam  actively  and 
proactively  integrates  into  the  world  economy.  It  seeks  to 
multilateralise and diversify international economic relations to 
avoid  dependence  on  a  certain  market  or  partner.  Viet  Nam 
takes  initiative  in  preparation  for  effectively  dealing  with 
adverse impacts as well as external economic pressure. 

On  the  basis  of  its  socio-economic  growth  rate,  Viet  Nam 
determines  its  national  defence  budget  in  order  to  meet  the 
demands  of  strengthening  national  defence  potential  for 
safeguarding the Homeland while ensuring neither falling into 
an  arms  race  nor  making  the  defence  budget  an  economic 
burden1. 

__________ 

1.  Viet  Nam's  GDP  for  defence  budget  in  2010,  2011,  2012,  2013,  2014, 
2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018 was 2.23, 2.82, 2.88, 2.69, 2.69, 2.72, 2.64, 2.51, and 
2.36 per cent respectively. 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

39 

Viet Nam is determined to develop its defence industry to 
meet  national  defence  requirements  and  missions  in  the  new 
situation,  step-by-step  becoming  part  of  the  national  industry. 
Viet  Nam  makes  selective  investment  in  several  advanced 
defence industrial establishments to move toward the formation 
of self-control, high-tech, and dual-use defence industrial groups 
or complexes. It also promotes international cooperation to meet 
the  requirements  of  national  defence  and  construction  in  the 
new situation. 

The  VPA  participates  in  economic  development  in 
connection  with  national  defence,  promotes  defence  trade 
cooperation  and  increases  investment  to  generate  resources 
for  building  the  VPA.  It  also  carries  out  major  programmes 
and  projects,  and  improves  the  quality  of  human  resources 
and  technical  infrastructure.  The  VPA  advocates  research 
and  application  of  advanced  science  and  technologies  and 
mastery  of  technologies  in  manufacturing  some  modern 
weapons  and  equipment,  advancing  towards  designing  and 
manufacturing  some  cutting-edge  weapons,  platforms  and 
equipment. 

Viet Nam advocates building an advanced culture deeply 
imbued  with  national  identity,  in  which  the  people  are 
ensured  all-round  development  to  be  able  to  meet  the 
demands  and  missions  of  accelerating  industrialisation  and 
modernisation,  developing  the  country  sustainably,  and 
defending  the  Homeland.  In  addition,  Viet  Nam  takes 
measures to preserve and bring into full play fine customs and 
habits  of  national  culture  while  selectively  acquiring  the 
quintessence  of  human  culture.  It  is  determined  to  assist 
Vietnamese communities abroad in preserving and protecting 

40 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

national cultural identity. Viet Nam resolves to deter cultural 
invasion  and  cultural  tendencies  that  go  against  its  fine 
customs  and  habits.  It  seeks  to  organise  and  closely  manage 
information  and  media  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  national 
defence and construction in the new context. 

It  is  important  to  educate  the  whole  Party,  people,  and 
military  to  raise  awareness  of  fine  traditions,  such  as 
"national  construction  must  go  together  with  national 
defence",  as  well  as  patriotism,  national  pride,  indomitable 
will,  and  the  wit  and  wisdom  of  ancestors  in  fighting 
enemies to protect the country. The unwavering loyalty to the 
CPV,  Homeland,  people,  and  socialist  regime  should  also  be 
cultivated along with political steadfastness, the will of "being 
determined  to  fight  and  determined  to  win",  the  bravery  and 
willingness  to  sacrifice  their  lives  for  national  independence 
and  freedom  and  people's  happiness,  the  firm  belief  in  the 
victory of renovation process and the path to socialism as well 
as  the  overall  power  of  the  country,  and  the  great  national 
solidarity. Importantly, it is to vigorously mobilise material and 
spiritual resources, both at home and abroad, with the first and 
foremost  attention  paid  to  tapping  patriotism,  independence, 
self-reliance,  creativity,  and  noble  humanity  of  the  people  for 
the acceleration of industrialisation and modernisation, striving 
to  soon  become  fundamentally  an  industrialised  country 
towards modernity1. 

As  dictated  by  realities,  military  culture  needs  to  be 
highly cohesive and deeply instilled into the whole social life 

__________ 

1.  See  Communist  Party  of  Viet  Nam,  Documents  of  the  XIIth  Party 

Congress, Ibid, p. 9. 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

41 

of  people.  It  becomes  a  solid  spiritual  foundation  and  vital 
internal  strength  for  developing  and  bringing  into  full  play 
the  values  of  Vietnamese  military  art.  It  is  important  to 
thoroughly  grasp  the  goals,  standpoints,  guiding  principles, 
missions,  and  solutions  of  the  Strategy  to  Safeguard  the 
Homeland in the new situation, Viet Nam's National Defence 
Strategy,  and  Viet  Nam's  Military  Strategy,  thus  arousing 
pride,  creative  potential,  honour,  and  responsibility  for 
preserving,  applying,  and  bringing  into  full  play  the  values 
of the nation's traditional military art. 

1.3. Building Scientific-Technological Potential 

Scientific-technological  potential  is  an  increasingly 
important component of national defence potential, which has 
a  direct  influence  on  scientific-technological  development  in 
military  and  national  defence  aspects  as  well  as  the 
organisational  structure,  management  and  operation  of  the 
armed  forces.  The  core  elements  of  scientific-technological 
potential  include  the  talent  and  qualification,  quantity  and 
quality  of  human  resources  as  well  as  material  infrastructure 
used  for  scientific-technological  research  and  development, 
dissemination and application. 

Viet  Nam  aims  to  build  the  scientific-technological 
potential of the all-people national defence as an integral part 
of  the  scientific-technological  development  of  the  country. 
Scientific-technological  development, 
the 
development  of  education  and  training,  is  regarded  as  the 
leading  national  policy,  a  cornerstone  and  driver  of  socio-
economic  development  and  national  industrialisation  and 
modernisation,  and  a  necessary  condition  for  building  a 

together  with 

42 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

strong,  prosperous  nation  and  firmly  preserving  national 
independence. 

Viet  Nam  pays  special  attention  to  building  a  corps  of 
cadres,  scientists,  and  human  resources  of  high-quality  and 
creating  material  and  technical  bases 
in  order  to  meet 
the  requirements  for  scientific-technological  research  and 
development  to  serve  key  projects  in  the  process  of  national 
industrialisation and modernisation. This is to provide scientific 
bases  for  the  government's  policies  on  economic  development 
and  consolidation  of  national  defence  and  security.  Viet  Nam 
seeks  to  increase  investment  in  training  and  improving  the 
quality  of  its  scientific  cadres  and  develop  proper  policies  to 
encourage  leading  scientists  and  technological  experts  to 
participate in military and national defence missions. 

to 

Viet  Nam  adopts  measures  to  gradually  establish  a 
scientific-technological  market  and  seeks 
increase 
investment  in  scientific-technological  development  from 
various  sources.  It  also  attaches  importance  to  applying 
scientific-technological  achievements  to  boost  production 
and  develop  the  defence  industry.  Viet  Nam  advocates 
expanding  international  cooperation  in  scientific-technological 
education  and  training,  and  dissemination  of  scientific-
technological knowledge for people. 

1.4. Building Military Potential 

Military  potential  is  manifested  in  the  competency  and 
combat  power  of  the  VPA  and  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force 
and the capacity to mobilise human  and material resources to 
meet  the  requirements  of  military  and  defence  missions.  It  is 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

43 

the core component of national defence potential, which is built 
on the basis of political-spiritual, economic, cultural, social, and 
scientific-technological  potential.  Military  potential  consists  of 
the two basic elements of manpower and weaponry, of which 
manpower is the decisive factor. 

Military  potential  is  shown  not  only  in  the  ability  to 
maintain, perfect, and ceaselessly develop combat power and 
readiness  of  the  armed  forces  but  also  in  reserves  of 
manpower  and  material  for  accomplishing  military  and 
defence tasks. Military potential is also seen in the ability to 
mobilise  resources  from  industry,  agriculture,  science  and 
technology,  transportation,  and  other  service  sectors  for 
military  and  defence  missions,  satisfying  demands  of  the 
new situation. 

Viet  Nam  builds  its  military  potential  according  to  a 
unified  strategy  as  required  by  the  tasks  of  national 
defence  and  construction.  The  combat  competency  and 
readiness  of  the  armed  forces  are  expressed  in  their 
organisation,  structure,  weaponry,  logistical  and  technical 
support,  military  art,  and  science  and  technology,  which 
are  usually  maintained,  improved,  and  developed  to meet 
the  requirements  of  the  people's  war  for  safeguarding  the 
Homeland. 

Viet  Nam  pays  due  attention  to  developing  its  human 
resources  with  political  steadfastness  and  absolute 
faithfulness to the CPV, Homeland, people, and the State of 
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. They are also required to 
practice  virtues  of  dignity,  diligence, 
integrity, 
uprightness,  public  spirit,  and  selflessness,  to  promote 
democracy and stricly observe military discipline, to respect 

thrift, 

44 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

and stand in solidarity with people, and to have professional 
expertise suitable for mission requirements. 

Viet  Nam  promulgates  preferential  policies  to  ensure 
sufficient  income  for  military  officers,  soldiers,  professional 
servicemen  and  women,  defence  employees  and  workers.  It 
seeks  to  improve  the  quality  of  permanent  forces,  secure  the 
quantity  and  quality  of  the  Reserve,  and  readily  supplement 
high-quality human  resources to satisfy  combat and readiness 
requirements. 

The  buliding  of  military  potential  is  closely  linked  to 
national  industrialisation  and  modernisation.  Viet  Nam 
develops  policies  and  mechanisms  with  the  aim  of  bringing 
into  full  play  economic,  scientific-technological,  cultural  and 
social achievements to build the armed forces, develop military 
art  and  science,  military  social  sciences  and  humanities,  and 
military technological science. 

Viet  Nam  advocates  building  its  military  potential  on  the 
basis  of  combining    national  power  with  power  of  the  times 
through  promoting  international  integration  and  cooperation, 
and defence diplomacy. It seeks to bring into full play the role 
of  defence  diplomacy  potential  in  defending  the  Homeland 
from  afar  and  preserving  a  stable,  peaceful  environment  for 
national  construction  and  development,  which  contributes  to 
maintaining  a  peaceful  environment  in  the  region  and  the 
world. 

It is important to improve the system of bodies and units in 
charge  of  defence  diplomacy  from  the  strategic  to  grass-roots 
echelons  in  the  VPA.  It  is  necessary  to  continue  improving 
the  legal  system  governing  defence  diplomacy,  including 
in  UN 
documents  relating  to  Viet  Nam's  participation 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

45 

peacekeeping  operations.  The  VPA  continues  investing  in 
building  facilities  used  for  foreign  relations  activities  and 
enhancing  operational  effectiveness  of  defence  attaché  offices 
overseas.  The  VPA  attaches  importance  to  education  and 
communication  to  raise  its  officers  and  soldiers'  awareness  of 
international integration and defence diplomacy. Due attention 
is  paid  to  training  and  nominating  the  VPA's  personnel 
for  leadership  and  management  positions  in  international 
organisations.  It  prioritises  consolidation  of  organisations  and 
training  to  improve  the  quality  of  human  resources  for 
international  integration  and  defence  diplomacy.  The  VPA  is 
determined to innovate contents and forms of cooperation and 
promote  the  effectiveness  of  foreign  relations  information, 
generating  uninamous  consensus  of  the  whole  Party,  people, 
military, and overseas Vietnamese communities on Viet Nam's 
national  defence  policy  of  peace,  friendship,  cooperation,  and 
development. 

2. BUILDING THE NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCES 

The  national  defence  of  Viet  Nam  is  based  on  the 
comprehensive,  all-people  strength  of  resources  and 
is 
composed of the all-people force and the people's armed forces. 

2.1. Building the All-People Force 

The  all-people  force  consists  of  sectors,  levels,  and  the 
masses. It is the most timely, rapid, numerous force and the 
strongest backbone of national defence. Viet Nam advocates 
building  the  national  defence  forces  of  the  people,  by  the 

46 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

people, and for the people. It seeks to promote overall power 
of  the  whole  people  to  build  the  national  defence  forces 
through  consolidating  the  political  system,  which  includes 
the  CPV,  the  State,  the  Vietnamese  Fatherland  Front,  and 
public mass organisations. The political system is the nucleus 
of  the  national  defence  forces,  playing  a  decisive  role  in 
mobilising and enhancing defence might of the country. The 
building,  consolidation,  and  enhancement  of  operational 
effectiveness  of  mass  organisations  are  of  great  significance 
in  gathering  and  mobilising  the  people  to  carry  out  defence 
and security tasks and to directly defend their own localities 
and  units,  contributing  to  maintaining  political  stability  and 
social order and safety. 

Building  the  all-people  force  consists  of  building  the  full-
time  forces,  the  part-time  forces,  and  the  mass  forces  in  all 
branches  and  sectors  in  conformity  with  the  socialist-oriented 
market  economic  mechanisms  as  well  as  forms  of  socio-
economic  organisations  and  conditions  of  specific  regions. 
Regular education and communication activities are needed to 
raise  the  people's  awareness  and  responsibility,  and  enhance 
their capacity to undertake the national defence mission. 

2.2.  Building  the  Viet  Nam  People's  Army,  Militia 

and Self-Defence Force 

Viet Nam advocates building three categories of the armed 
forces,  who  are  absolutely  loyal  to  the  Homeland,  people, 
the  CPV,  and  the  State  and  tasked  with  safeguarding 
independence,  sovereignty,  territorial  unity  and  integrity, 
national  security,  social  order  and  safety,  the  CPV,  the 
State, and people. 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

47 

The three categories of the armed forces consist of the Main 
Force,  Local  Force,  and  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force, 
primarily  responsible  for  building  the  all-people  national 
defence. They possess political steadfastness and consistency in 
the targets of national independence and socialism, endeavour 
to gain high competency and combat power, and are organised 
in  an  adept,  compact,  strong,  mobile,  highly  flexible  and 
efficient direction. They also have an appropriate, synchronous 
organisational  structure  guided  by  the  line  of  all-people 
national  defence  and  people's  war,  and  are  ready  to  expand 
forces to meet the requirements of wars. 

The Main Force is organised to be an elite force, equipped 
with  strong  firepower  and  means  of  rapid  manoeuvre,  and 
able  to  conduct  independent  and  combined  operations. 
Priorities are given to developing commandos. 

The Local Force is organised on the basis of characteristics 
and  defence  and  security  missions  specific  to  local  areas  and 
regions,  including  borders,  seas  and  islands.  They  are  armed 
appropriately  to  bring  into  full  play  their  effectiveness  in 
defence zones. 

Viet  Nam  builds  an  extensive  and  robust  Reserve, 
sufficient 
in  quantity  and  quality,  with  high  political 
steadfastness,  proper  structure,  and  good  military  expertise, 
laying  the  foundation  for  the  development of  the  VPA  when 
needed.  The  VPA's  Reserve  is  well  managed  and  trained  to 
readily supplement the permanent force. 

The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  is  organised  in  an 
extensive,  robust  manner.  It  has  high  quality  and  is  well 
suited  for  different  localities,  economic  sectors,  business 
enterprises, and administrative units. 

48 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

3. BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE 
NATIONAL DEFENCE POSTURE 

Building  the  all-people  national  defence  posture  is  to 
organise,  deploy  and  position  national  defence  forces  and 
allocate  potential  throughout  the  territory  with  a  unified 
strategic intent to ensure victory over the hostile forces' plots 
and  acts  against 
territorial 
integrity,  and  interests  of  Viet  Nam,  and  to  allow  a  shift  to 
the  posture  of  people's  war  to  safeguard  the  Homeland. 
Building the all-people national defence posture is elaborated 
as follows: 

independence,  sovereignty, 

3.1.  Building  a  Strong  "People's  Hearts  and  Minds 

Posture" 

A strong "people's hearts and minds posture" determines 
victory  of  Viet  Nam's  national  defence,  aimed  at  protecting 
the  CPV,  State,  people,  and  socialist  regime,  maintaining  a 
stable,  peaceful  environment  for  national  construction  and 
development,  and  safeguarding  independence,  sovereignty, 
unity,  and  territorial  integrity.  Building  a  strong  "people's 
hearts and minds posture" is a regular, vital task of the CPV 
and the whole political system. 

The  all-people  national  defence  is  built  on  the  "people's 
hearts  and  minds  posture"  base,  which  is  reflected  in  the 
boundless faithfulness to the Homeland, people, and socialist 
regime  and  in  the  patriotism,  national  pride,  and  people's 
unanimous  support  and  absolute  belief  in  the  leadership  of 
the  CPV,  the  State's  management,  the  success  of  renovation 
process and socialist regime in Viet Nam, the capabilities and 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

49 

overall power of the country, and invincible might of people 
and the great national unity. 

It  is  important  to  respect  and  bring  into  full  play  people's 
mastery,  pay  due  attention  to  people's  legitimate  aspirations, 
and  timely  address  urgent  issues  that  arise,  creating  social 
consensus and contributing to the building of a strong "people's 
hearts  and  minds  posture",  encourage  the  whole  people  to 
participate  in  the  building  of  national  defence  and  security, 
heighten  the  self-protection  and  defence  of  national  interests, 
and  strive  for  the  goal  of  building  and  firmly  defending  the 
Homeland. 

The VPA is the core force to build the "people's hearts and 
minds  posture",  actively  participating  in  the  development  of 
political  grassroots  and  assisting  people  with  production, 
hunger  eradication  and  poverty  reduction,  construction  of 
new-style rural areas, and disaster preparedness and response. 
The VPA carries out the struggle to defeat any plots and acts of 
sabotage by the hostile forces, especially in the national defence 
and  security  areas  of  strategic  importance  in  national  defence 
and security. Also, it promotes the fine traditions and qualities 
of  "Uncle  Ho's  Soldiers",  cements  the  strong  civil-military 
bonds, and boosts people's confidence in the CPV, the State, the 
VPA, and socialist regime. 

3.2. Combining National Defence and Security with 

Economy and Society and vice versa 

The  combination  of  national  defence  and  security  with 
economy and society and vice versa requires the incorporation 
of  national  defence  and  security  into    every  socio-economic 
branches,  industries  and  sectors  under  the  consistent 

50 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

management  of  the  State,  helping  to  consolidate  and  enhance 
national  defence  and  security  and  promote  national  socio-
economic development. 

It is determined that resources should be focused on socio-
economic  development,  simultaneously  spared  to  strengthen 
national defence and  security  according to the socio-economic 
development projects, programmes, and plans, not only for the 
country  but  also  for  regions,  strategic  areas,  each  and  every 
locality,  the  socio-economic  development  strategy,  and  the 
strategy to safeguard the Homeland in the new situation. 

Master  plans  for  populating  areas  are  to  be  developed 
to  meet  the  demands  of  socio-economic  development  and 
defence  and  security  consolidation,  to  combine  socio-
economic  development  with  the  strengthening  of  defence 
potential, forces, and posture, to develop human resources 
training  policies  and  plans  for  defence  missions  both  in 
peacetime  and  wartime,  and  to  allocate  adequate  budgets 
for  defence  missions  as  stipulated  in  the  Law  on  State 
Budget. 

It  is  important  to  establish  economic-defence  zones  and 
defence-economic zones in strategic areas, hinterland, remote 
areas,  border,  sea,  and  island  areas,  and  areas  of  extreme 
poverty.  Projects  are  to  be  launched  to  build  the  nearshore 
island chain into economic, scientific, technological and defence 
centres  following  multifunctional  models  which  are  partially 
self-financing,  and  combine  economic  activities  with  national 
defence  at  sea,  especially  in  offshore  waters  and  islands. 
Further investment shall be made in constructing border patrol 
roads  to  facilitate  socio-economic  development  and  defence 
and security consolidation. 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

51 

Defence  enterprises  and  military  units,  which  are  tasked 
with participating in socio-economic and cultural development, 
must  operate  in  line  with  their  defence  missions,  must  not 
engage  in  only  economic  activities,  and  must  abide  by  law. 
They should bring into full play self-reliance and resilience and 
practice  close  economic-defence  combination,  contributing  to 
strengthening  national  defence  potential  and  posture  and 
accomplishing  the  cause  of  renovation,  national  defence  and 
construction.  It  is  necessary  to  integrate  defence  industrial 
establishments  with  civil  industries  in  service  of  socio-
economic  development  and  defence  missions.  Activities  of 
production,  business,  investment,  research  and  application  of 
science  and  technology  are  required  to    meet    the  need  of 
combining  socio-economic  development  with  defence  and 
security  consolidation  and  to  be  ready  for  national  defence 
mobilisation when necessary. 

3.3. Building Comprehensively Strong Military Regions 

in an Integrated  National Defence System 

Military  region  defence,  which  is  an  integral  part  of 
national  defence,  requires  the  building  of  real  capacity, 
national  defence  potential,  all-people  national  defence 
posture, and defence zones to successfully carry out defence 
missions in the military regions. 

It  is  important  to  have  synchronous  plans  for  the 
preparation  and  defence  of  military  regions  in  both 
peacetime and wartime. Units and bodies of military regions 
are  to  be  built  into  comprehensively  strong  organisations 
with high combat capabilities. Militia and Self-Defence Force 
is  to  be  made  robust,  extensive,  and  capable  of  undertaking 

52 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

defence  missions  in  military  regions'  areas  of  responsibility. 
Defence zones are to be constructed in a firm, interconnected, 
all-round  layout.  The  all-people  national  defence  and  its 
posture  are  integrated  with  the  people's  security  and  its 
posture  in  the  military  regions.  The  combination  of  socio-
economic  development  with  national  defence,  security, 
diplomacy  and  vice  versa  should  be  made  to  establish  and 
administer  economic-defence  zones  of  military  regions,  to 
conduct defence and security education and dissemination of 
law on defence, and to carry out national defence mobilisation, 
policies regarding welfare of military families and preferential 
treatment  of  people  with  meritorious  service  to  the  country 
in the military regions. 

The military regions set up plans and give instructions to 
their  subordinate  organisations  and  units.  They  collaborate 
and  coordinate  with  relevant  units  under  the  Ministry  of 
National  Defence,  local  authorities,  and  agencies  to  execute 
state management of national borders, preserve security and 
social order and safety in border areas, border gates, islands, 
waters, and airspace of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in 
the  military  regions  and  carry  out  defence  diplomacy  tasks. 
Together  with  relevant  local  agencies,  organisations,  and 
units,  they  instruct  their  subordinates  to  participate  in 
building  the  political  system,  the  great  unity  of  the  whole 
people, and comprehensively strong grassroots. The military 
regions  realise  their  civil  defence,  take  measures  to  fight 
against information warfare and cyberwarfare, ensure social 
order  and  safety,  and  prevent  and  combat  crime  in  the 
regions. 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

53 

3.4.  Building  Provinces  and  Cities  into  Strong 

Defence Zones  

It is important to build provincial and municipal defence 
zones  in  every  aspect,  including  potential,  force,  posture, 
politics,  ideology,  economy,  culture,  society,  defence, 
security, and diplomacy. The local armed forces are made 
comprehensively  strong  with  high  combat  capabilities, 
playing  the  core  role  in  executing  defence,  military  and 
security missions. Preventive measures are taken to defeat all 
plots  and  sabotage  activities  of  hostile  forces,  protecting 
national  security,  preserving  social  order  and  safety,  and 
preventing  and  combating  crime,  creating  an  environment 
conducive  to  socio-economic  and  cultural  development, 
successfully  defending  the  localities,  and  readily  providing 
other localities with manpower and materials. Provinces and 
cities carry out civil defence activities and make preparations 
in  every  aspect  to  promptly  respond  to  defence,  security 
emergencies, armed conflicts and wars, conduct total defence 
mobilisation  to  meet  the  demands  of  long-term  combat  and 
combat support, and be ready to arm all people. 

3.5.  Building  the  All-People  National  Defence 
Posture  in  Association  with  the  People's  Security 
Posture 

Viet Nam advocates establishing comprehensively strong 
defence  and  security  postures  and  bringing  into  full  play 
advantages  of  the  VPA  and  Public  Security  as  the  core 
elements  of  national  overall  power.  This  is  both  a  mission 
and  an  objective  requirement  of  national  defence  and 
construction. It is also the responsibility of the whole political 

54 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

system  and  people,  under  the  leadership  of  the  CPV,  with 
the  VPA  and  Public  Security  playing  the  key  role.  It  is 
important to closely combine the building of national defence 
posture  with  that  of  the  people's  security  posture  in  the 
strong  all-people  national  defence  and  security.  Cadres,  the 
CPV's members and people of all strata should be provided 
with  high-quality  education  on  national  defence  and 
security.  Further  investment  is  made  in  building  facilities 
and developing weapons and equipment for national defence 
and security. 

4. LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF 
NATIONAL DEFENCE 

4.1. Leadership of the Communist Party of Viet Nam 

over the National Defence 

The  CPV  exercises  the  absolute,  direct  and  all-round 
leadership  over  the  national  defence  to  safeguard  the 
Homeland.  The  leadership  of  the  CPV  is  a  decisive  factor  of 
the  revolutionary,  all-people,  and  comprehensive  nature  of 
national defence, determining victories in the cause of national 
defence  to  safeguard  the  Homeland.  It  is  a  must  to  resolutely 
uphold and protect the leadership of the CPV, and defend the 
State and people in all circumstances and contexts. 

The  CPV  exercises  its  national  defence  leadership 
through  its  political  platforms,  guidelines,  strategies  and 
directions for policies on national defence. This leadership is 
institutionalised  via  the  legal  system  with  relevant  legal 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

55 

documents.  The  CPV’s  national  defence  leadership  is 
achieved  through  the  system  of  the  CPV's  organisations  and 
members.  The  CPV  sets  forth  and  implements  leadership 
mechanisms  of  national  defence,  stipulating  functions  and 
mandates  of  the  Party  committees  of  all  levels,  from  the 
Central  to  the  grassroots,  and  exercises  the  leadership  over 
the Party and political work in the building and operation of 
the all-people national defence. 

4.2. Leadership of the Communist Party of Viet Nam 

over the Viet Nam People’s Army 

The  CPV  exercises  the  absolute,  direct  and  all-round 
leadership over the VPA. The CPV’s leadership of the VPA is 
centrally  uniform  on  the  Party  Central  Committee,  and 
constantly  and  directly  under  the  Politburo  and  Secretariat 
through  a  system  of  Party  organisations,  command 
organisations and political organisations and political cadres 
at  various  levels,  and  public  mass  organisations  in  the 
military grass-roots units. 

The  system  of  Party  organisations  in  the  VPA  is 
organised  from  the  Central  Military  Commission  (CMC)  to 
grass-roots organisations and works in the line of the political 
platform,  Party  Regulation,  resolutions  and  instructions,  and 
the  State's  laws.  The  CMC  is  appointed  by  the  Politburo, 
including  some  members  of  the  Party  Central  Committee 
within  the  VPA  and  others  outside  the  VPA.  The  General 
Secretary  of  the  Party  Central  Committee  is  the  Chairman 
of  the  CMC.  Party  committees  (from  the  CMC's  Party 
organisations  to  grass-roots  Party  cells)  are  elected  by  their 
corresponding Party congresses. 

56 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

The  CMC  makes  recommendations  to  the  Party  Central 
Committee,  the  Politburo  and  Secretariat  on  military  and 
national  defence  guidelines  and  tasks,  exercises  all-round 
leadership  over  the  VPA  in  all  areas  and  coordinates  and 
instructs  Party  committees  directly  under  the  Party  Central 
Committee to implement the CPV's lines, the State's laws and 
policies, the CMC's military and national defence resolutions 
and  instructions.  The  CMC  executes  the  direct  leadership 
over the building of the VPA and all-people national defence, 
and  the  improvement  of  quality  and  efficiency  of  the  Party 
and  political  work  to  maintain  and  promote  the  CPV’s 
leadership  over  the  VPA.  The  CMC  complies  with  the 
mechanism  of  collective  decisions  on  major  issues,  namely 
guidelines,  programmes,  and  implementation  plans  of  the 
CPV’s  directives,  resolutions,  and  measures  to  build  the 
military  as  well  as  personnel  work.  The  CMC  leads  the 
General  Political  Department  and  through  the  General 
Political  Department  to  exercise  its  leadership  over  Party 
committees  and  the  system  of  political  organisations, 
political  commissars  and  junior  political  commissars  at  all 
levels with regard to the Party and political work in order to 
make the VPA strong in politics,  ideology and organisation, 
capable of fulfilling all assigned tasks. 

The  system  of  political  organisations  in  the  VPA  is 
composed  of  the  General  Political  Department  and  its 
subordinate political units. The General Political Department 
takes  charge  of  the  Party  and  political  work  in  the  VPA, 
operating  under 
the  Party  Central 
Committee's  Secretariat,  particularly  under  the  direct  and 
constant  leadership  of  the  CMC.  Based  on  resolutions  and 

leadership  of 

the 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

57 

directives  of  the  Party  Central  Committee,  Politburo,  Party 
Central Committee's Secretariat and guidance and instructions 
of the Central commissions, the General Political Department 
searches for and  recommends the CMC for the decisions on 
guidelines  and  execution  of  the  Party  and  political  work  in 
the  VPA.  Guided  by  resolutions  of  the  CMC  and  orders  of 
the  Minister  of  National  Defence,  the  General  Political 
Department  determines  action  plans  for  the  Party  and 
political  work  to  direct,  instruct  and  inspect  all  the  VPA's 
units for their performance of that work.  

The  General  Political  Department  directs,  instructs  and 
inspects  all  units  in  the  VPA  to  conduct  the  work  of  Party 
building,  personnel,  political  propaganda  and  ideological 
education, military security, policy and mass mobilisation in 
the  VPA.  It  also  coordinates  with  functional  military  and 
non-military  bodies  to  seek  and  make  recommendations  to 
the  CPV  and  State  on  the  policies  regarding  the  VPA,  the 
Militia and Self-Defence Force and welfare policies for military 
families. The General Political Department directs and instructs 
to build and consolidate organisation and operation of the Ho 
Chi  Minh  Communist  Youth  Union,  Trade  Union,  Women's 
Union,  coordinating  with  the  Party  and  Central  organisations 
and  State  functional  bodies  for  an  effective  direction  and 
instruction  of  the  Party  and  political  work  carried  out  by 
localities, ministries and Central commissions in the realisation 
of defence and military missions, as well as the building of the 
Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  and  the  Reserve.  The  General 
Political  Department  coordinates  with  related  branches  to 
check,  inspect  and  supervise  the  implementation  of  the 
investigation  and  judicial  work  in  the  military.  It  also  directs 

58 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

and  participates  in  theoretical  research  and  performance 
reviews  of  the  Party  and  political  work  in  the  VPA  and  the 
Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force.  The  General  Political 
Department  conducts  research  and  development  of  military 
social sciences and humanities, and participates in research on 
Vietnamese military art and science.  

Political  organisations 

in  the  VPA  take  charge  of 
conducting  the  cultivation  and  education  of  the  CPV's 
guidelines  and  directions,  the  State's  laws  and  policies, 
directing and instructing units to build pure and sound Party 
organisations  and  cells  as  well  as  carrying  out  anti-
psychological  warfare  measures  on  the  ideological  and 
ideological 
political  front  to  denounce  vice  and  false 
expressions and allegations of hostile forces. They coordinate 
with  local  Party  committees,  authorities  and  public  mass 
organisations  in  educating  and  mobilising  people  to  fulfil 
their duties of defending the Homeland.  

There  are  political  commissars  and  political  units  from 
regiment to military region level and their equivalents. Units 
from  company  to  battalion  level  and  their  equivalents  have 
junior  political  commissars.  The  political  commissars  and 
junior political commissars are responsible to their superiors 
and Party committees for the entire Party and political work 
of their units, for directly guiding, organising and executing 
the  Party  and  political  work  as  regulated,  and 
for 
participating  in  the  development  and  implementation  of 
their units' work plans. 

Commanders,  political  commissars  and  junior  political 
commissars  are  assigned  by  the  CPV,  State  and  the  VPA 
certain authority and responsibilities within concerned areas 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

59 

and  are  held  accountable  before  law,  the  Party  committees, 
commanders,  political  units,  their  political  commissars  and 
junior  political  commissars  at  higher  levels  and  their  Party 
committees for all the activities of their units according to the 
assigned  areas  of  responsibility  and  tasks,  strictly  obeying 
their Party committees' leadership.  

Commanders  are  responsible  for  complying  with  and 
seriously implementing the superiors' orders and instructions, 
as  well  as  resolutions  of  their  units'  Party  committees  on  all 
activities  of  their  units.  In  the  implementation  of  their  tasks, 
the  commanders  have  to  report  to  their  Party  committees  on 
the  tasks  assigned  and  propose  the  guidelines  and  measures 
of  leadership  for  the  Party  committee  to  discuss  and  make 
decisions. When an emergency situation arises, the commanders 
determine  and  make  timely  decisions  to  fulfil  the  task,  and 
then  report  and  stand  accountable  before  their  superiors  and 
Party committees. 

The  relations  between  political  commissars 

(junior 
political  commissars)  and  commanders  are  relationships  of 
work  coordination.  Political  commissars  (junior  political 
commissars)  and  commanders  must  proactively  and  closely 
work  together  in  the  spirit  of  solidarity,  unity,  reliability, 
respect,  and  mutual  assistance  for  task  accomplishment. 
Together  they  must  give  their  mind  to  the  building  of  pure 
and  sound  Party  organisations  and  comprehensively  strong 
units.  They  have  to  timely  inform  and  discuss  with  each 
other on the resolutions, orders and instructions assigned by 
their  superiors,  make  joint  assessment  of  situation  and 
propose guidelines and measures of leadership for the Party 
committees or standing Party committees to make decisions. 

60 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

They also have to build action plans and delegate work and 
responsibilities for implementing and inspecting the execution 
of resolutions of Party organisations and units. 

4.3. State Management of National Defence 

The State of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam realises its 
national defence management as defined by its Constitution 
and  laws.  The  basic  contents  of  the  State’s  national  defence 
management  consist  of  promulgating  and  conducting  the 
implementation  of  a  system  of  statutory  documents  on 
national  defence,  developing  and  implementing  strategies 
and  policies  on  national  defence,  building  the  all-people's 
national  defence  and  plans  for  the  defence  of  the  country, 
national  defence  mobilisation  and  support  activities.  It 
organises and guides the implementation of national defence 
tasks  and  international  defence  cooperation,  and  other 
necessary measures to defend the Homeland.   

The  State  builds  a  revolutionary,  regular,  highly-skilled, 
and  gradually  modernised  VPA,  which  has  an  appropriate 
permanent force, a large and powerful Reserve, and a strong 
and  extensive  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force,  playing  the 
core  role  in  performing  national  defence  tasks.  The  State 
educates  the  entire  people  in  national  defence  and  security, 
develops the national defence industry, ensures the provision 
of proper equipment for the people's armed forces, combines 
national  defence  and  security  with  economic,  cultural  and 
social  activities  and  vice  versa,  implements  policies  regarding 
welfare  of  military  families,  and  secures  the  material  and 
spiritual lives of the officers, soldiers, defence employees and 
workers suitable to the activities of the VPA. 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

61 

The  National  Assembly  is  the  supreme  organ  of  State 
authority of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, the sole body 
with  the  right  to  promulgate  laws  concerning  fundamental 
domestic  and  foreign  policies,  the  country’s  socio-economic, 
national  defence  and  security  tasks,  make  decisions  on  the 
matters of war and peace, define the state of emergency and 
other  special  measures  so  as  to  ensure  the  national  defence 
and security, and determine the building of the armed forces. 
The  National  Assembly  exercises  its  supreme  supervision 
over the State’s national defence activities.  

The National Defence and Security Council is composed of 
the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Members. The list of 
members of the National Defence and Security Council shall 
be submitted by the State President to the National Assembly 
for  approval.  The  National  Defence  and  Security  Council 
shall  propose  the  National  Assembly  or,  when  the  National 
Assembly  cannot  meet,  the  Standing  Committee  of  the 
National  Assembly  to  decide  on  a  state  of  war,  mobilise  all 
forces  and  national  recourses  to  defend  the  Homeland, 
execute special tasks and authority assigned by the National 
Assembly  in  case  of  war  and  decide  the  participation  of  the 
people's armed forces in UN peacekeeping operations in the 
region and around the world. 

The State President has overall command of the people's 
armed  forces  and  holds  the  office  as  Chairperson  of  the 
National  Defence  and  Security  Council,  decides  the  award, 
promotion, demotion or deprivation of the ranks of general, 
admiral,  vice  admiral  and  rear  admiral,  and  appoints, 
relieves from duty or dismisses the Chief of the General Staff, 
the  Chief  of  the  General  Political  Department  of  the  VPA. 

62 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Based  on  resolutions  of  the  National  Assembly  or  the 
Standing  Committee  of  the  National  Assembly,  the  State 
President promulgates or annuls decisions to declare a state 
of  war,  and  on  the  basis  of  resolutions  of  the  Standing 
Committee  of  the  National  Assembly,  issues  an  order  on 
general  mobilisation  or  partial  mobilisation,  declares  or 
cancels  a  state  of  emergency  or,  in  case  the  Standing 
Committee  of  the  National  Assembly  cannot  meet,  declares 
or cancels a state of emergency nationwide or in a particular 
locality and decides to send the armed forces to participate in 
UN peacekeeping operations. 

The  Government  is  the  highest  state  administrative  
body of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The Government 
promulgates  decrees  and  resolutions  to  specify  the 
implementation  of  national  defence  laws  and  ordinances. 
It  also  makes  policies  on  the  consolidation  of  national 
defence  and  building  of  the  armed  forces,  maps  out  the 
master and specific plans for defence mobilisation, organises 
and directs the implementation of national defence tasks and 
necessary  measures  to  safeguard  the  Homeland.  As  delegated, 
ministries,  branches  and  local  authorities  issue  a  system  of 
statutory  documents  to  fulfil  tasks  on  national  defence  in 
accordance  with  the  law  and  undertake  national  defence 
education  and  international  cooperation  in  certain  aspects 
related  to  national  defence,  ensure  the  material  life  for  the 
armed  forces, 
implement  welfare  policies  for  military 
families, and inspect the fulfilment of national defence tasks.  
The  Ministry  of  National  Defence  is  the  advisory  organ 
for  the  Party  and  State  to  consult  on  matters  of  national 
defence  and  military  guidelines  and  duties  in  safeguarding 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

63 

the  Homeland,  stands  accountable  before  the  Government  
the 
on  national  defence  state  management,  organises 
implementation  of  building,  management  and  command  of 
the VPA, the Militia and Self-Defence Force, and administers 
public services as stipulated by law. The Minister of National 
Defence is the highest commander of the VPA and the Militia 
and  Self-Defence  Force,  a  Member  of  the  National  Defence 
and  Security  Council,  Deputy  Secretary  of  the  CMC  and 
Member  of  the  government  in  charge  of  directing  the 
execution  of  the  State  management  functions  on  national 
defence  and  military  affairs  as  defined  by  law  and  presides 
over  the  planning  and  organises  the  implementation  of  the 
National Defence Strategy. Assisting the Minister of National 
Defence  are  Deputy  Ministers  of  National  Defence,  the 
General Staff, the General Political Department, four general 
departments,  Ha  Noi  Capital  High  Command  and  seven 
military  regions,  two  services  (Navy  and  Air  Defence-Air 
Force),  Border  Guard  High  Command,  six  arms,  four  army 
corps,  Viet  Nam  Coast  Guard  Command,  Cyber  Command 
and the Ministry of National Defence affiliated units. 

The  General  Staff  commands  and  operates  the  VPA  and 
the Militia and Self-Defence Force, and organises and directs 
the development of the VPA and the Militia and Self-Defence 
Force,  at  the  same  time  exercises  the  command  of  military 
operations.  The  General  Staff  is  led  by  the  Chief  of  General 
Staff, who is assisted by the vice chiefs. The General Staff is 
composed  of  functional  departments  of  operations,  combat 
training, manpower and so forth. The Chief of General Staff, 
concurrently the Deputy Minister of National Defence, takes 
the  role  of  the  Minister  of  National  Defence  in  the  latter’s 

64 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

absence.  The  Chief  of  General  Staff  directs  offices  and  units 
directly  under  the  General  Staff  to  formulate  the  military 
strategies,  the  master  and  specific  plans  for  defending  the 
country,  presides  over  coordinating,  instructing,  inspecting 
and  motivating  other  ministries,  ministerial-level  agencies, 
and the people’s committees at all levels to implement legal 
regulations  on  national  defence,  and  inspects  and  urges  the 
VPA units to abide by the military discipline, the State laws 
and the orders of the Minister of National Defence. 

The  General  Political  Department  takes  charge  of  the  Party 
and  political  work  in  the  military  and  operates  under  the 
leadership of the Secretariat, constantly and directly under the 
CMC. It has the Chief and Vice Chiefs, functional departments 
responsible  for  the  Party  organisation,  personnel  work, 
political  propaganda  and  ideological  education,  military 
security, policy work and mass mobilisation.  

The  functional  organisations  at  the  general  department 
level  of  the  Ministry  of  National  Defence  include  the  
General  Department  of  Logistics,  the  General  Department  
of  Technology,  the  General  Department  of  Defence  Industry 
and  the  General  Department  of  Defence  Intelligence.  Each 
general  department  has  the  director  and  deputy  directors 
(the  General  Department  of  Defence  Intelligence  has  the 
the  political 
Commander  and  Deputy  Commanders), 
commissar and deputy political commissar, the staff office, the 
political  department,  and  other  functional  departments  and 
subordinate units with specific responsibilities and duties. 

The  General  Department  of  Logistics  is  the  organ  under 
the  Ministry  of  National  Defence  which  has  the  functions 
to  advise,  direct,  and  organise  such  logistical  activities  as 

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

65 

material supplies, daily necessity support, medical care, and 
transportation for the military. It has functional departments 
responsible  for  logistics  consultation,  military  ordnance, 
military  medicine,  stationing  facilities,  fuel,  transportation 
and other subordinate agencies and units. 

The General Department of Technology is the organ under the 
Ministry of National Defence which has the functions to advise 
the  CMC  and  the  Ministry  of  National  Defence  to  direct  and 
instruct  the  technical  support  in  the  VPA  and  the  Militia  and 
Self-Defence  Force,  assists  the  Minister of  National  Defence to 
conduct  the  state  management  functions  on  the  technical 
support, directs the technical branch in the VPA and the Militia 
and Self-Defence Force on the matters concerned, and manages 
and directs its subordinate units. 

The  General  Department  of  Defence  Industry  is  the  organ 
under  the  Ministry  of  National  Defence  which  has  the 
functions  to  advise  the  CMC  to  direct  the  building  and 
development  of  defence  industry  in  the  VPA,  assists  the 
Minister of National Defence to conduct the state management 
functions  on  defence  industry  in  the  whole  country.  It  is 
in  charge  of  commanding  and  managing  its  subordinate 
units  composed  of  functional  departments  and  divisions, 
manages  and  directes  the  establishments  manufacturing 
and maintaining military weapons and equipment, research 
institutions, vocational schools, and subordinate units. 

The  General  Department  of  Defence  Intelligence  assists 
the  Minister  of  National  Defence  to  conduct  the  state 
management functions on defence and military  intelligence. It 
directly  carries  out  intelligence  activities  at  the  strategic  level. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  the  advisory  organ  for  the  Minister  of 

66 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

National  Defence  and  the  VPA's  Chief  of  General  Staff  to 
consult on the force organisation and intelligence operations. It 
is  the  lead  department  directly  responsible  for  directing  and 
commanding  the  military  intelligence  and  reconnaissance 
network in terms of intelligence professionalism. 

The  Foreign  Relations  Department  is  the  state  management 
organ  on  the  VPA’s  international  defence  relations  and 
international  integration,  functioning  as  the  advisory  organ 
for the Standing CMC and the Minister of National Defence 
to  consult  on  the  guidelines,  directions  and  measures  to 
international  defence relations  and  international  integration, 
instructing  and  managing  international  defence  relations 
activities,  and  planning  and  organising  those  activities  in 
assigned  domains.  It  represents  the  Ministry  of  National 
Defence in working with foreign defence attachés, diplomatic 
representatives,  international  and  regional  organisations  in 
defence matters. 

The Office of the Ministry of National Defence, concurrently 
the  Office  of  the  CMC,  and other  functional  bodies  play  the 
role  of  a  consultative  organ  and  provide  assistance  to  the 
Ministry  of  National  Defence.  Besides,  the    Minister  of 
National Defence is assigned to manage certain Government 
agencies.  

the  Minister  of  National  Defence 

The  Government  Cryptographic  Agency 

is  a  national 
cryptography  office,  in  charge  of  cryptographic  management, 
assisting 
to  provide 
recommendations for the CPV and the State on cryptographic 
work  and  carry  out  the  task  of  the  state  management  of 
cryptography,  contributing  to  ensuring  timely  and  absolutely 
accurate,  secure  and  secret  information  for  the  leadership  of  

Part two: BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE   

67 

the  CPV,  the  management  of  the  State,  the  operation  of  the 
Government, the command and guidance of the commander of 
the  people’s  armed  forces  in  any  situations.  It  proactively 
protects  and  participates  in  the  struggle  against  cryptanalysis 
activities harmful to national security, the State's interests, and 
legitimate  rights  and  interests  of  other  organisations  and 
individuals. 

Viet Nam Coast Guard is an element of the people's armed 
forces  which  plays  a  role  as  a  specialised  force  of  the  State 
and exercises its core roles of law enforcement and protection 
of  national  security,  order  and  safety  at  sea.  It  provides 
recommendations  to  the  Minister  of  National  Defence  or 
makes  proposals  to  the  CPV  and  the  State  to  issue  policies 
and  laws  on  the  protection  of  national  security,  order  and 
safety  at  sea,  protecting  national  sovereignty,  sovereign 
rights  and  jurisdiction  over  the  sea  waters  of  Viet  Nam.  It 
exercises  the  functions  to  control  maritime  security,  order, 
and  safety,  and  conduct  law  enforcement  activities  as 
stipulated  by  Viet  Nam's  laws  and  relevant  international 
conventions and agreements signed or participated in by the 
Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam.  Viet  Nam  Coast  Guard  has 
four  Coast  Guard  zones  (1,  2,  3,  4). Each has  a  Coast  Guard 
Command  and  subordinate  units.  Viet  Nam  Coast  Guard  is 
equipped with vessels, aircraft, weapons, explosives, support 
instruments and other specialised equipment to carry out its 
functions,  missions  and  rights  in  the  sea  waters  of  the 
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the sea waters beyond the 
Vietnamese  sea  waters  stipulated  by  Vietnamese  law  and 
related  international  conventions  and  agreements  of  which 
Viet Nam is a signatory. 

68 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

The Department of Search and Rescue is the organ under the 
General Staff of the VPA, which functions as the lead organ 
to advise the CMC, the Ministry of National Defence, and the 
General  Staff  to  direct  military  units  to  conduct  the  task  of 
disaster  prevention  and  relief,  search  and  rescue.  It  also 
functions  as  the  Standing  Office  of  the  National  Committee 
for  Search  and  Rescue,  assisting  the  Government  to  direct 
and  coordinate  both  military  and  non-military  forces  in 
search and rescue operations, and disaster relief. 

The Standing Office of the National Steering Committee on 
the  Settlement  of  Post-war  Unexploded  Ordnance  and  Toxic 
Chemical Consequences (also known as Office 701 based under 
the  Department  of  Military  Science)  is  in  charge  of  providing 
recommendations  for  building  and  implementing  the  work 
plans and programmes of the Standing Office and the Steering 
Committee.  It  coordinates  with  Viet  Nam  National  Mine 
Action  Center  (VNMAC)  under  Engineering  Command  and 
the  National  Action  Center  for  Overcoming  Toxic  Chemical 
and  Environment  Consequences  (NACCEC)  under  the 
Chemical Command. These are the two governmental agencies 
responsible  for  conducting  propaganda  and  cooperation 
programmes  and  appealing  for  domestic  and  international 
donations  and  assistance  to  overcome  post-war  unexploded 
ordnance and toxic chemical consequences. 

PART THREE 

THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY  
AND  
THE MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE 

 
 
 
 
Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

71 

1. THE VIET NAM PEOPLE'S ARMY  

1.1. The Vietnamese Military History Tradition 

the  history, 

constantly.  Throughout 

The  thousand-year  history  of  the  foundation  and 
development  of  the  Vietnamese  nation  is  crystallised  in 
special  and  invaluable  traditions  of  defence  and  military. 
The  military  history  of  Viet  Nam  was  traced  back  to  the 
beginning  of  the  making  of  the  nation  and  has  been 
developed 
the 
Vietnamese  nation  has  always  heightened  the  spirit  of 
undauntedness, self-reliance, resilience, intelligence and the 
art  of  war  to  build  a  unique  military  history  tradition.  In 
each  period  of  history,  the  Vietnamese  nation  has  always 
worked  creatively  and  achieved  glorious  victories  and 
exploits in the cause of fighting against foreign invaders for 
national  defence.  The  Vietnamese  nation  has  always 
followed  the  traditions  of  "building  the  country  must  go 
with  defending  the  country",  "defending  the  country  when 
it  is  still  in  peace",  defending  the  country  with  all-people 
unbeatable strength and closely combining politics, economics, 
culture,  military  and  diplomacy  to  create  the  nation's  overall 
power  to  defeat  any  foreign  invaders.  Since  the  CPV  was 
founded and led the revolution, the nation's military history 
tradition has been inherited and developed to a new height, 

 
72 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

contributing  to  firmly  defending  the  socialist  Vietnamese 
Homeland. 

1.2.  History  of  the  Foundation  and  Development  of 

the Viet Nam People’s Army 

From  the  6th  Plenum  of  the  Party  Central  Committee 
(November  1939),  and  the  7th  Plenum  (November  1940), 
especially the 8th Plenum (May 1941), chaired by Nguyen Ai 
Quoc,  the  CPV  (under  the  name  the  Indochina  Communist 
Party)  decided  to  shift  its  revolutionary  activities  with  a 
focus  on  national 
to  begin  building 
liberation,  and 
revolutionary  bases  and  preparing  for  taking  up  arms  to 
seize  power.  Under  the  directive  of  President  Ho  Chi  Minh 
and  the  command  of  comrade  Vo  Nguyen  Giap,  the  Viet 
the 
Nam  Propaganda  Unit  of 
forerunner  of  the  VPA,  was  founded  on  the  basis  of 
revolutionary armed teams in Viet Bac on 22 December 1944 
in Nguyen Binh district, Cao Bang province. 

the  Liberation  Army, 

At the time of foundation, the Viet Nam Propaganda Unit 
of  the  Liberation  Army,  with  only  34  cadres  and  soldiers, 
soon  showcased  the  tradition  of  fighting  against  foreign 
invaders  and  the  military  art  of  the  nation.  Implementing 
President  Ho  Chi  Minh's  directive  "The  first  battle  must  be 
won"1,  two  days  after  its  formation,  with  a  surprise,  brave 
and  ingenious  way  of  fighting,  the  Propaganda  Unit  of  the 

__________ 

1. Ho Chi Minh National Academy of Politics - The Institute of Ho Chi 

Minh  and  the  Party's  Leaders,  Biography  of  Ho  Chi  Minh,  National  Political 

Publishing House, Ha Noi, 2016, Vol. 2, p.194. 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

73 

Liberation  Army  won  the  two  first  battles  of  Phai  Khat  and 
Na  Ngan,  heralding  the  VPA's  tradition  of  destroying  the 
enemy,  assuredness  of  victory  and  determination  to  win 
from  the  first  battle.  On  15  May  1945,  the  Viet  Nam 
Propaganda  Unit  of  Liberation  Army  was  merged  with  the 
National Salvation Army and renamed the Liberation Army 
of Viet Nam, becoming the main military force of the Front of 
Viet Nam Independence League during the General Uprising 
to seize power in the August Revolution in 1945.  

After the success of the 1945 August  Revolution and the 
foundation of the Democratic Republic of Viet Nam, the VPA 
together  with  the  entire  people  and  Party  strived  to  build 
and defend the young state, foil the riot plots of reactionary 
forces, maintain security and order, firmly protect the newly 
established revolutionary government, promote the build-up 
of force and prepare for the long-term resistance war.   

The  nationwide  resistance  war  against  the  French 
aggression broke out. Facing a professional military, equipped 
with  modern  weapons,  the  VPA  thoroughly  grasped  the 
guidelines  of  fighting  a  long,  comprehensive  and  all-people 
resistance  war,  relying  on  its  own  strength,  inheriting  and 
developing  the  ancestors'  military  art,  firmly  relying  on 
people, and finding appropriate ways of fighting. It defeated 
the French colonialists' "attack fast, win fast" strategy, forcing 
the enemy to fight a long war, exploiting its weaknesses, and 
worsening  the  enemy's  contradictions  of  concentration  and 
dispersal  of  force  to  become  more  serious.  The  more 
reinforcements they sent, the longer they fought, the heavier 
losses they suffered. 

74 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

From a "bare head and bare feet" army and paramilitary 
teams,  the  VPA  has  constantly  grown,  developing  from 
guerrilla  warfare  to  maneuver  warfare  and  to  fortification 
and  siege  warfare,  from  small-scale  attacks  to  a  large-scale 
ones,  from  guerrilla  warfare  to  conventional  warfare, 
complementing and developing military art while fighting. 

Through a nine-year resistance war full of hardships and 
sacrifices,  the  VPA  and  Vietnamese  people  defeated  the 
enemy military strategies one after another. With the victory 
of  the  1953-1954  Winter  Spring  Offensive  which  culminated 
in  the  victory  of  Dien  Bien  Phu,  the  VPA  and  Vietnamese 
people compelled the French Government to sign the Geneva 
Accords  on  Ending  the  War  and  Restoring  Peace 
in 
Indochina, successfully ending the resistance war against the 
French  aggressors,  liberating  the  North  of  Viet  Nam  and 
setting  a  shining  example  for  national  liberation  movement 
around  the  world.  For  the  first  time  in  history,  a  small 
military  in  a  colonial  country,  equipped  with  rudimentary 
weapons, had defeated a professional colonialist military.  

Since  peace  was  restored  in  the  North  of  Viet  Nam,  "the 
building  of  a  strong  VPA,  step  by  step  advancing  toward 
regularity  and  modernity"  was  promoted.  Thanks  to  the 
correct anticipation of the imperialist strategic intention and 
the imminent confrontation with the US military, which was 
the  most  powerful  military  in  the  world,  the  VPA  took 
initiative  in  building  forces  with  an    increased  might  and 
combat  capability.  With  the  concerted  efforts  of  the  whole 
people  and  military  along  with  significant  assistance  of  the 
socialist  countries,  the  VPA  made  great  leaps  in  all  aspects 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

75 

and  became  the  backbone  in  the  struggle  to  defend  the 
North,  liberate  the  South  and  unify  the  country.  In  this 
historical  confrontation,  under  the  leadership  of  the  CPV 
and  President  Ho  Chi  Minh,  Viet  Nam  was  proven  to  not 
only dare to fight and determine to fight, but also know how 
to win. The more fighting the VPA experienced, the stronger 
it  became,  gradually  neutralising  the  enemy's  strength, 
making  their superiority in modern weapons and equipment 
meaningless,  forcing  them  to  be  stretched  over  the  battlefield. 
The  longer  the  war  lasted,  the  more  the  enemy  suffered  an 
"impasse".  

Through  combat  practice,  the  VPA's  strategies,  tactics  and 
fighting  art  were  increasingly  sharpened  and  became  more 
effective,  defeating  the  enemy's  "air  mobility"  and  "carrier-
borne" warfare strategies. Together with the people and troops 
in  the  South,  the  people  and  troops  in  Northern  Viet  Nam 
continuously defeated the massive waves of attack launched by 
the  US  Navy  and  Air  Force.  The  Vietnamese  artillery,  missile 
and air force units had achieved an ever higher rate of combat 
efficiency  in  the  history  of  warfighting,  destroying  numerous 
modern aircraft and warships of the enemy. 

Great victories of the people and armed forces both in the 
North and the South, especially the victory of the North over 
the  12-day-and-night  strategic  bombardment  by  B-52  strategic 
bombers  over  Ha  Noi  (codenamed  by  the  US  "Operation 
Linebacker II") in December 1972, forced the US Government 
to  sign  the  Paris  Peace  Accords  to  end  the  war  and  restore 
peace in Viet Nam, recognising the independence, sovereignty, 
unity,  and  territorial  integrity  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of 

76 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Viet Nam. This created favourable conditions for the Vietnamese 
people and troops to launch the "Ho Chi Minh Campaign" to 
liberate  the  entire  South  of  Viet  Nam,  bringing  the  whole 
country aboard the path to socialism and ushering in a new 
era for the nation. 

The  VPA  also  stood  shoulder  to  shoulder  with  Lao  and 
Cambodian people to fight against common enemies for each 
country's freedom and independence. Implementing President 
Ho Chi Minh's teaching "Helping people of friendly countries 
is helping ourselves"1, the VPA fought side by side with Lao 
and Cambodian revolutionary forces in the entire Indochina 
theatre  in  30  years'  resistance  wars  against  the  French 
colonialists  and  the  US  imperialists.  The  image  of  the 
Vietnamese  volunteer  soldiers  full  of  hardships  in  the 
difficult years of resistance wars will never fade in the hearts 
and minds of millions of Lao and Cambodian people. 

Following the victory in the anti-American resistance war 
for  national  salvation,  the  VPA  embarked  upon  a  new  long 
march,  fighting  to  win  in  the  wars  to  safeguard  the 
Homeland  at  the  Northern  and  Southwestern  borders,  as 
well as fulfilling the international tasks to help Lao people to 
firmly  protect  the  revolutionary  achievements  and  to  save 
Cambodian  people  from  genocide  and  bring  about  the 
restoration of the Cambodian nation. 

Entering the period of renovation, facing complex changes 

in  international  and  domestic  situations,  bringing  into  full 

__________ 

1.  Ho  Chi  Minh,  Completed  Collection,  National  Political  Publishing 

House, Ha Noi, 2011, Vol. 8, p. 105. 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

77 

play the tradition of absolute loyalty to the CPV and nation's 

revolutionary  cause,  the  VPA,  under  absolute  and  direct 

leadership  in  all  aspects  of  the  CPV,  persistently  continued 

with the goal of national independence and socialism decided 

by the CPV, President Ho Chi Minh, and Vietnamese people. 

The  traditional  nature  of  "Uncle  Ho's  Soldiers",  tempered  in 

the  two  resistance  wars  and  the  war  to  safeguard  the 

Homeland,  will  forever  shine  in  the  cause  of  building  and 

safeguarding the socialist Vietnamese Homeland. 

Implementing the CPV's guidelines, the VPA has actively 

participated 

in  economic  development,  enhancing  and 

consolidating  defence, 

improving 

combat 

capability, 

contributing  to  the  entire  people's  effort  to  firmly  safeguard 

the  Homeland.  Defence  enterprises  carry  out  defence  tasks 

while participating in socio-economic development activities. 

The  VPA  actively  and  proactively  launches  activities  of 

gratitude and appreciation, post-war consequence mitigation 

and  recovery,  disaster  preparedness  and  response,  search 

and rescue, and so forth. 

Over the past 75 years, the VPA has become more mature 

and  powerful.  Together  with  the  whole  people,  it  has 

overcome  difficulties  and  challenges  and  achieved  glorious 

victories, defeating the aggressors, making great contributions 

to  the  struggle  for  national  liberation,  national  defence  and 

construction,  deserving  President  Ho  Chi  Minh’s  appraisals 

“Our  military,  loyal  to  the  Party,  pious  to  the  people  and 

ready  to  fight  and  sacrifice  their  lives  for  independence  and 

78 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

freedom of the Homeland and socialism, will accomplish any 
tasks, overcome any difficulties and defeat any enemies”1. The 

history  of  the  VPA  is  the  glorious  combat  history  of  the 

revolutionary  military  which  bears  a  working  class  nature, 

comes from the people and fights for the people.  

1.3.  Functions  and  Missions  of  the  Viet  Nam 

People's Army 

The  CPV  and  President  Ho  Chi  Minh  defined  that  the 

VPA  is  a  revolutionary  army,  and  "an  army  ready  for 

combat,  an  army  ready  for  work  and  an  army  ready  for 
production"2.  The  fundamental  functions  of  the  VPA  have 

been affirmed and promoted over the past 75 years. 

Functioning  as  "an  army  ready  for  combat",  the  VPA  has 
been built in the direction of a revolutionary, regular, highly-
skilled,  gradually  modernised  army,  with  some  forces 
advancing  straight  to  modernity.  It  is  an  army    strong  in 
politics,  ideology,  organisation,  and  absolutely  loyal  to  the 
CPV,  Homeland  and  people.  The  VPA  is  to  be  built  into  an 
adept,  compact,  strong,  mobile,  highly  flexible  and  efficient 
army  equipped  with  modern  weaponry.  The  VPA  is  to 
promote  research  and  development  of  the  Vietnamese 
military  art  and  regularly  conduct  training  exercises  to 
improve comprehensive quality, combat strength and combat 

__________ 

1. Ho Chi Minh, Completed Collection, Ibid, Vol. 14, p. 435. 

2.  Communist  Party  of  Viet  Nam,  Complete  Party  Documents,  National 

Political Publishing House, Ha Noi, 2003, Vol. 24, p. 847. 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

79 

readiness.  The  VPA    plays  a  core  role  in  building  the  all-
people  national  defence,  successfully  deals  with  defence 
situations, and is always ready to defeat all types of aggressive 
independence,  sovereignty  
war,  and 
and  territorial  integrity  of  the  Homeland,  contributing  to 
maintaining a peaceful and stable environment for the building 
and development of the country. 

firmly  defend 

to 

Functioning  as  "an  army  ready  for  work",  the  VPA  has 
always maintained its close ties with the people. Being one of 
the  core  forces  participating  in  mass  mobilisation  and  grass-
roots  political  system  construction,  the  VPA's  units  are  to 
continue to actively conduct mass-related work, take the lead 
in socio-economic development in remote and secluded areas, 
borders,  seas  and  islands,  actively  take  part  in  disaster 
preparedness and response, search and rescue,  and contribute 
to the protection of the environment. The VPA units continue 
to  closely  coordinate  with  local  authorities,  and  actively 
participate  in  hunger  elimination  and  poverty  reduction, 
contributing to the improvement of the people’s material and 
spiritual  life.  The  work  of  international  defence  relations  has 
gained  a  number  of  important  achievements,  contributing  to 
maintaining  a  peaceful  and  stable  environment  for  national 
construction  and  development,  and  increasing  the  position 
and reputation of the country and the VPA in the international 
arena,  such  as  participating  in  UN  peacekeeping  operations, 
joint  training  exercises  of  Humanitarian  Assistance  and 
Disaster  Relief  (HADR),  Search  and  Rescue  (SAR),  and 
international  cooperation  in  overcoming  the  legacy  of  war, 
and so forth. 

80 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Functioning  as  "an  army  ready  for  production",  VPA's 
economic-defence  units  have  always  maintained  a  steady 
growth  rate,  providing  jobs  for  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
people.  They  also  have  fulfilled  financial  duties  to  the 
State  budget  and  produced  dual-use  and  high-value 
technological  products,  contributing  to  national  economic 
growth  and  accomplishing  the  task  of  combining  socio-
economic development with defence consolidation. 

1.4. Organisation of the Viet Nam People’s Army 

The  VPA  comprises  the  Main  Force  and  Local  Force, 
military regions, services, the Border Guard, army corps and 
arms,  a  system  of  logistical  support  units,  technical  support 
units,  military  academies,  officer  training  schools,  research 
institutes, and economic-defence units. 

1.4.1. Ground Forces 

The Ground Forces consist of seven military regions (1, 2, 
3,  4,  5,  7,  and  9)  and  Ha  Noi  Capital  High  Command,  six 
arms (Commando, Artillery, Tank and Armour, Engineering, 
Signal,  and  Chemical)  and  four  army  corps  (1,  2,  3,  and  4). 
Each military region, army corps and arm has a Commander 
and  Political  Commissar,  Deputy  Commanders  and  Deputy 
Political Commissar, functional agencies responsible for staff, 
political  work,  logistical  and  technical  affairs  and  other 
subordinate units.  

The  military  regions  are  organised  to  defend  strategic 
directions and areas. Each military region consists of affiliated 
regular divisions, brigades, regiments and subordinate units. A 
military  region  commands  its  affiliated  units,  provincial  and 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

81 

district  military  units  and  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force 
within the region.  

An  army  corps  is  the  largest  mobile  unit  of  the  Ground 
Forces,  responsible  for  defending  the  nation's  critical, 
strategic  areas.  An  army  corps  is  composed  of  divisions, 
brigades, regiments and other affiliated units.  

The  arms  are  tasked  with  participating  in  combined 
operations  as  assigned  and  also  exercise  the  function  of 
technical  support  and  professional  training  of  officers  and 
technical personnel for the whole VPA. Each arm has its own 
combat  units,  officer  training  colleges  and  professional 
technical schools. 

The  Ground  Forces  of  Viet  Nam  are  equipped  in  the 
modern  direction  so  as  to  achieve  the  capabilities  of  high 
mobility,  strong  offensive  capabilities  and  firepower,  and 
fighting  in  various  terrains,  in  all  weathers  in  conformity 
with  the  art  of  modern  people’s  war.  At  present,  Viet  Nam 
has  produced  and  put  into  service  a  number  of  relatively 
modern infantry weapons. 

Having  undergone  the  wars  for  national  liberation  and 
defence,  the  Ground  Forces  have  gradually  matured  and 
excellently  fulfilled  their  duties.  Many  units  have  been 
awarded the title of Hero of the People’s Armed Forces and 
other noble awards. 

1.4.2. Air Defence-Air Force 

Established on 22 October 1963, the Air Defence-Air Force 
assumes the responsibilities for both national air defence and 
air  force.  It  is  the  core  force  responsible  for  the  control  and 
defence  of  the  airspace,  protection  of  the  nation’s  critical 

82 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

facilities and the people, and participates in safeguarding seas 
and  islands  of  the  Homeland.  The  service  plays  the  role  of  a 
consultative  organ  for  the  Ministry  of  National  Defence  on 
matters  concerning  the  building  of  the  air  defence  of  the 
Ground Forces and other service and arms air forces. The Air 
Defence-Air  Force  is  able  to  independently  perform  its 
missions,  or  to  participate  in  combined  operations.  The 
military  Air  Transportation,  in  addition  to  combat  support 
and  combat  readiness,  takes  part  in  natural  disaster  relief 
operations and economic development activities. 

The  Air  Defence-Air  Force  is  organised  into  the  Service 
Command,  combat  units,  combat  support  units,  economic-
defence  units  and  education  and  training  institutions.  The 
Service  Command  has 
the  Commander  and  Political 
Commissar,  Deputy  Commanders  and  Deputy  Political 
Commissar. It also consists of functional agencies responsible 
for  staff,  political  work,  technical  and  logistical  affairs, 
people's  air  defence,  and  other  affiliated  units.  The  main 
combat  units  of  the  Service  include  air  force  divisions,  air 
defence divisions, and affiliated air units.  

The  Air  Defence-Air  Force  is  currently  equipped  with 
Su-30  MK2  multirole  fighters,  Su-27  fighters  and  Su-22 
fighter  bombers,  C-295  tactical  military  transport  aircraft, 
MiG-21  supersonic  jet  fighters  and  interceptors,  S-300PMU1 
air defence missile systems, Spyder short and medium range 
mobile  air  defence  systems,  36D6M1-2  mobile  3D  airspace 
surveillance  radar  systems  and various  types  of  anti-aircraft 
guns.  The  Service  has  also  researched  and  manufactured 
some  weapons  and  equipment,  upgraded  and  modernised 
some radar and air defence missile systems and so forth. 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

83 

During  the  liberation  wars,  the  Air  Defence-Air  Force 
performed its duties with excellence, defeated the two wars of 
sabotage of the U.S. Air Force and Navy in the North, protected 
the transportation lines of supplies from the North to the South, 
making  worthy  contributions  to  the  defence  of  the  North, 
liberation  of  the  South,  and  national  reunification.  The  Air 
Defence-Air  Force  have  been  awarded  the  title  of  Hero  of  the 
People’s Armed Forces and other noble awards. 

1.4.3. Navy 

Established on 7 May 1955, the Viet Nam People’s Navy 
is the core service in protecting sovereignty, sovereign rights, 
territorial unity and integrity of Viet Nam’s seas and islands 
and  building  the  national  defence  posture  at  sea.  The  Navy 
has  responsibility  to  manage  and  firmly  defend  the  sea 
waters  and  islands  under  Viet  Nam’s  sovereignty,  ready 
for  combating  independently  or  participating  in  combined 
operations  to  defeat  any  aggression  at  sea.  It  is  also 
responsible  for  maintaining  security,  countering  any  acts  of 
jurisdiction  and 
violating  sovereignty,  sovereign  rights, 
national  interests  of  Viet  Nam  at  sea,  and  participating  in 
disaster  prevention  and  relief,  and  search  and  rescue, 
securing economic production and other normal activities in 
Viet  Nam's  sea  waters  and  islands  in  conformity  with 
Vietnamese and international laws. 

The  Navy  is  organised  into  the  Service  Command  and 
subordinate units. The Service Command has the Commander 
and  Political  Commissar,  Deputy  Commanders  and  Deputy 
Political  Commissar.  It  also  consists  of  functional  agencies 

84 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

responsible  for  staff,  political  work,  logistical  and  technical 
affairs.  The  Navy  affiliated  units  comprises  five  naval  region 
commands  (1,  2,  3,  4,  and  5),  naval  brigades,  academy  and 
schools,  technical  research  institute  and  economic-defence 
units.  Each  naval  region  is  organised  into  the  naval  region 
command  and  affiliated  units  such  as  naval  centres,  brigades 
and other support and service units. 

The  Navy  has  been  built  and  developed 

in  the 
"revolutionary,  regular,  highly-skilled  and  modernised" 
direction  with  five  arms  components:  surface  ships  and 
submarines, naval air force, coastal artillery and land-to-sea 
missiles, marines, and naval commandos. Besides, there are 
support  and  service  units  such  as  signal,  radar,  electronic 
warfare,  engineering,  chemical,  and  so  forth.  These  forces 
have been equipped with a number of modern weapons and 
equipment  such  as  SSK  Kilo-class  (Type  636)  submarines, 
Gepard 3.9 class frigates, project 12418 class missile corvettes, 
TT-400TP gunboats, project 10412 class patrol boats, Bastion 
mobile  coastal  defence  missile  systems,  EC-225,  DHC-6 
aircraft,  and  SCORE-3000  radar  systems.  The  Viet  Nam 
People's  Navy  has  been  trained  to  master  weapons  and 
technical  equipment,  thus  enhancing  combat  power  and 
readiness,  meeting  the  requirements  to defend  the  country's 
sovereignty over the seas and islands.   

Having  undergone  the  combat,  building  and  maturing 
process, the Viet Nam People's Navy has been awarded the title 
of  Hero  of  the  People’s  Armed  Forces  twice  and  many  other 
noble awards. 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

85 

1.4.4. Border Guard 

Established  on  3  March  1959,  the  Border  Guard  is  the 
people's  armed  force  of  the  CPV  and  the  State  of  the  Socialist 
Republic of Viet Nam, constitutes part of the VPA, and plays a 
core  and  specialised  role  in  managing  and  protecting  the 
sovereignty,  territorial  integrity,  security  and  order  of  the 
national  borders  on  land,  seas,  islands  and  border  gates 
according  to  its  tasks  prescribed  by  law.  It  is  also  a  force 
component in the border provincial and district defence zones. 
The  Border  Guard  exercises  its  functions  in  accordance 
with  the  laws  of  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and 
international  conventions,  of  which  the  Socialist  Republic  of 
Viet  Nam  is  a  signatory,  related  to  sovereignty,  security  of 
the national borders on land, seas, islands and border gates. 

territory, 

the  border 

The  Border  Guard 

is  tasked  with  managing  and 
protecting the national borderline and the system of national 
border  markers,  fighting  against  and  preventing  all  acts  of 
illegal  border 
encroaching  upon 
crossings  on  land  and  at  sea,  illegal  immigration  and 
residence  in  the  country,  illegal  exploitation  of  natural 
resources  and  other  acts  of  infringing  upon  the  national 
sovereignty,  interests,  security  and  order,  which  may  cause 
harms  to  the  border  environment.  The  Border  Guard  also 
takes the lead role in working with concerned branches and 
localities  to  effectively  manage  and  protect  the  national 
border  and  maintain  security,  order  and  social  safety  of  the 
national borders on land, seas, islands and border gates. 

The Border Guard is consistently organised and commanded 
from  the  Ministry  of  National  Defence  to  grass-roots  units, 

86 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

including  the  Border  Guard  High  Command,  provincial 
(municipal) border guard commands, maritime border guard 
brigades,  and  border  guard  posts,  maritime  border  guard 
detachments.  The  Border  Guard  High  Command  has  the 
Commander and Political Commissar, Deputy Commanders 
and Deputy Political  Commissar. It also  consists of agencies 
responsible  for  staff,  political  work,  technical  and  logistical 
affairs,  border  reconnaissance,  drugs  and  criminal  prevention, 
border gates, academy and schools and other affiliated units. 
increasingly  stronger, 
The  Border  Guard  has  become 
professionally competent, and expert in Viet Nam's laws, as 
well  as  international  laws  and  practices.  It  is  equipped  with 
professional  means  and  devices  and  increasingly  modern 
weapons to accomplish its tasks. 

Having undergone the combat, building and development 
process,  the  Border  Guard  has  achieved  numerous  feats  of 
arms  and  glorious  victories  and  been  awarded  the  title  of 
Hero  of  the  People’s  Armed  Forces  twice  and  many  other 
noble awards. 

1.4.5. Cyber Command  

Established  on  15  August  2017,  the  Cyber  Command  is  a 
combat  component  of  the  VPA.  It  plays  a  core  role  in 
defending  national  sovereignty  in  cyberspace,  countering 
information  warfare,  cyberwarfare  and  safeguarding  the 
Homeland  in  cyberspace.  It  is  also  an  important  force  which 
participates  in  protecting  national  critical  information  systems, 
ensuring  information  network  safety,  protecting  national 
network  security  and  countering  "peaceful  evolution"  in 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

87 

cyberspace, contributing to the entire Party, people and military's 
effort to firmly defend the independence, sovereignty, unity and 
territorial integrity of the Homeland. 

The Cyber Command comprises the Command Headquaters, 
brigades and centres. The Cyber Command has the Commander 
and  Political  Commissar,  Deputy  Commanders  and  Deputy 
Political Commissar  and agencies responsible for  staff, political 
work, technical and logistical affairs, professional operations and 
affiliated units. 

1.4.6. Viet Nam Peacekeeping Department 

Established  on  27  May  2014,  Viet  Nam  Peacekeeping 
Department  (previously  known  as  Viet  Nam  Peacekeeping 
Centre) is under the direct leadership of the Ministry of National 
Defence.  It  is  the  advisory  organ  for  the  CMC,  Minister  of 
National  Defence,  and  the  Steering  Board  of  the  Ministry  of 
National Defence on the leadership, command, and operation of 
in  the  UN  peacekeeping 
the  VPA's  forces  participating 
operations.  It  also  takes  charge  of  the  management,  command 
and  operation  of  the  whole  process  of  preparation  and 
participation  in  the  UN  peacekeeping  operations  and  assists  
the  Minister  of  National  Defence  in  performing  the  state 
management of the VPA's UN peacekeeping operations. 

1.4.7. Local Force 

Established on 7 April 1949, the Local Force is a component 
of the people’s three-category armed forces and is organised 
in  provinces,  cities,  towns  and  districts.  It  is  a  core  force  in 
the  local  people’s  war,  a  mobile  force  engaging  in  operations 

88 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

mainly  in  the  designated  local  area,  coordinating  and 
working  with  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force,  people's 
public  security  force  in  operations,  and  maintaining  the  local 
political security in peacetime. The Local Force is organised to 
suit specific situational conditions, defence and security tasks of 
a particular locality and territorial areas such as border, coastal 
areas, seas and islands. It is equipped with appropriate types of 
weapons for combat operations in defence zones.  

The Local Force is under the direct command of the local 
military commands and under the leadership and guidance 
of  the  local  Party  committees  and  governments.  It  is 
regularly trained for its vigilance, military, political, technical, 
logistical  competencies,  the  readiness  for  combat,  coordination 
and collaboration with the Militia and Self-Defence Force in 
operations to protect the local people and governments. The 
Local  Force  also  works  closely  with  the  Militia  and  Self-
Defence  Force  to  maintain  order  and  security  within  their 
own  localities,  render  assistance  to  the  Militia  and  Self-
Defence Force in training, and contribute to the fulfilment of 
training tasks for the Reserve. 

1.4.8. Reserve  

The Reserve is a component of the VPA and an important 
force,  contributing  to  the  building  of  the  all-people  national 
defence and the people's war posture. It is ready to supplement 
the  active  force  when  required,  meeting  the  demands  of 
building and safeguarding the socialist Vietnamese Homeland 
in the new situation.  

Viet  Nam  advocates  making  the  Reserve  powerful,  with 
sufficient  quantity,  high  quality,  right  composition,  good 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

89 

military knowledge and professional skills and ready for the 
expansion  of  force  when  needed.  The  Reserve  includes 
reserve  military  personnel  and  technical  means  of  national 
economy  which  are  earmarked  and  planned  to  readily 
supplement  the  active  force  of  the  VPA.  The  Reserve  is 
organised on the basis of the same table of organisation and 
equipment of the VPA with its components corresponding to 
the  active  forces  of  the  services  and  arms  of  the  Main  Force 
and Local Force. 

The  Reserve  is  selected  from  military  personnel  who 
have  finished  their  military  service  and  civilians  trained 
as  regulated  by  law.  Annually,  the  reserve  units  are 
summoned  for  mobilisation  readiness  checks  and  trained 
according to a common training curriculum. Reservists are 
selectively  appointed  to  commanding  posts  of  the  reserve 
units  and  get  allowances  as  regulated.  The  Ministry  of 
National  Defence  instructs,  directs,  inspects  and  urges 
localities  and  units  to  build  and  mobilise  the  Reserve  in 
conformity  with  the  laws,  and  directly  administers  the 
training  arrangement  of  the  reserve  units.  Ministries, 
branches, and provincial and municipal people’s committees, 
in  consultation  with  the  VPA's  active  units,  coordinate  the 
allocation  of  military  reservists  and  technical  equipment  to 
reserve units on the basis of mobilisation quotas assigned by 
the Government. 

1.4.9. Academies, Colleges and Schools  

The  VPA  has  a  complete  system  of  academies,  colleges 
and  schools  to  meet  the  demands  for  training  officers  and 

90 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

non-commissioned  officers  as  well  as  technicians  at  all 
levels  for  the  VPA,  postgraduates  and  civilian  technicians.  
Those  institutions  also  conduct  scientific  and  technological 
research in the VPA, foster all kinds of  learners on defence 
and security knowledge, educate and further advance political 
theoretical knowledge. 

The  Ministry  of  National  Defence  directly  administers  

the  National  Defence  Academy,  Political  Academy,  Army 

Academy, Logistics Academy, Military Technology Academy, 

the  1st  Army  Officer  Training  College,  the  2nd  Army  Officer 

Training College, and the Political Officer Training College. 

The National Defence Academy is the education and training 

centre  for  the  Party  and  State’s  high-ranking  cadres.  It  is 

tasked  with  training  and  qualifying  learners  for  advanced 

political theoretical knowledge, training the VPA's operational 

and  strategic-level  officers,  fostering  defence  and  security 

knowledge  development 

for  key  executive  cadres  of 

ministries, agencies, branches from the Central to local levels, 

conducting  scientific  research,  providing  military  master's 

and  doctoral  programmes,  and  undertaking  international 

cooperation  in  defence  and  security  training  for  military 

officers and civilians. 

The Army Academy is tasked with training and conducting 

scientific  research,  qualifying  learners  for  advanced  political 

theoretical  knowledge,  providing  military  master's  and 

doctoral programmes, training infantry regiment and division 

command and staff officers, arms brigade command and staff 

officers, infantry division reconnaissance commanding officers, 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

91 

command and staff officers of the district military commands 

and equivalents, providing short courses for the completion of 

command and staff training for officers of infantry regiments 

and local military commands, as well as for tactics lecturers at 

regimental and divisional level. 

The Political Academy is tasked with training and qualifying 

learners for advanced political theoretical knowledge, training 

regiment  and  division-level  political  officers  and  lecturers  of 

military  social  sciences  and  humanities,  improving  political 

theory,  providing  military  master's  and  doctoral  programmes 

in military  social  sciences  and humanities, offering courses on 

the Party and political work and defence and security. 

The  Logistics  Academy  is  tasked  with  providing  tertiary 

education  and  training  for  junior  logistics  officers,  training 

tactical  and  operational-level 

logistics  officers,  providing 

master's  and  doctoral  programmes  in  military  logistics  and 

finance, and training logistics technicians. 

The  Military  Technology  Academy  is  tasked  with  providing 

undergraduate,  graduate  and  postgraduate  education  and 

training  programmes 

in  military 

technology, 

technical 

command and staff, project management, conducting research 

and  development  of  military  science  and  technology,  and 

participating in economic development. 

The  Military  Medical  Academy  is  tasked  with  training 

doctors, pharmacists, physicians and providing undergraduate, 

graduate  and  postgraduate  education  courses.  It  is  also  a 

military medical research centre. 

92 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

junior 

The  1st  and  2nd  Army  Officer  Training  Colleges  are  tasked 
with  training 
infantry  command  officers  (from 
platoon,  company  to  battalion  levels),  providing  military 
master's  and  doctoral  programmes,  offering  military 
courses at undergraduate (including college-level courses) 
and  graduate  levels,  and  training  military,  defence  and 
security lecturers.  

The Political Officer Training College is tasked with providing 
tertiary  education  and  training  for  political  officers,  training 
lecturers  of  military  social  sciences  and  humanities  and 
teachers  and  lecturers  of  defence  and  security  education, 
qualifying junior officers and graduates for some majors. 

The remaining military academies, colleges and schools are 
under  the  management  of  general  departments,  services  and 
arms.  They  are  tasked  with  training  junior  command  officers 
and providing them with university education, training tactical 
and  operational  level  command  and  staff  officers,  providing 
military  master's  programmes  and  participating  in  scientific 
research.  

1.4.10. Major Research Institutes 

The Institute for Defence Strategy is a research institution  on 
defence and military issues. It plays the role of a consultative 
organ  on  issues  related  to  national  defence,  military  and 
defence  diplomacy,  conducting  research  on  international, 
regional  and  domestic  situations,  analysing  and  forecasting 
potential threats to Viet Nam’s national defence, conducting 
research  on  issues  of  military  ideology,  guidelines  and 
doctrines,  the  art  of  war,  modes  of  warfare,  economic-

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

93 

national  defence  issues,  proposing  the  directions  for  the 
organisation and construction of the armed forces, the VPA's 
leadership  and  command  system,  providing  strategic 
recommendations  on  defence  diplomacy,  and  participating 
in defence diplomacy as assigned by the Ministry of National 
Defence. 

The  Institute  of  Military  Social  Sciences  and  Humanities  is 
tasked  with  conducting  research  on  the  development  and 
application of social sciences and humanities knowledge to the 
military, as well as theoretical and practical issues of defending 
the  Homeland,  and  building  the  all-people  national  defence 
and the Vietnamese people's armed forces.  

The Institute for Military Science and Technology is a research 
institution  on  military  science  and  technology  that  conducts 
research  on  and  develops  equipment  and  weapons  for  the 
VPA 
the  requirements  of  modern  warfare, 
simultaneously  doing  research  on  sciences,  techniques  and 
technologies for civilian use. 

to  meet 

Viet  Nam  Institute  for  Military  History  is  a  historical 
research  institution  of  the  VPA  in  charge  of  doing  research 
on the military history of Viet Nam and the world in order to 
draw  lessons  and  experience  that  serve  the  tasks  of  the 
Homeland’s  construction  and  protection  at  present  and  in 
the future. 

The  Institute  for  Defence  International  Relations  is  a  strategic 
research  institution,  which  is  tasked  with    conducting  research 
on  foreign  defence  relations  and  policies,  simultaneously 
providing policy recommendations, participating in defence and 
security  external  relations  activities  both  multilaterally  and 

94 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

bilaterally as well as bilateral dialogues, building, consolidating 
and  expanding  relations  with  international  and  domestic 
research  institutions  for  academic  exchanges  and  issues  of 
common interest. 

1.4.11. Major Economic-Defence Units 

Economic-defence units of the VPA are the leading force in 
combining  economic  development  with  national  defence  and 
security  consolidation.  The  VPA’s  groups,  corporations  and 
economic-defence corps have made considerable contributions 
to  the  cause  of  industrialisation  and  modernisation  of  the 
country,  playing  the  role  of  a  key  force  in  the  most  difficult 
regions,  participating  in  local  socio-economic  development, 
thus creating strong and stable national defence posture in the 
vital areas of the Homeland. 

The  economic-defence  corps  have  performed  well  the 
fundamental goal of combining economic, cultural and social 
development  with  the  consolidation  of  national  defence  
and  security,  contributing  to  maintaining  political  stability, 
consolidating  great  national  solidarity,  and  building  the 
"people's  hearts  and  minds  posture"  and  the  all-people 
national defence posture  in the vital areas of the country. The 
economic-defence  corps'  effectiveness  has  been  manifested 
in 
their  performance  of  socio-economic  development, 
contributing to the improvement of the material and spiritual 
life of the people and the preservation of national defence and 
security  in  remote  and  secluded  areas,  border  regions  and 
islands.  The  economic-defence  corps  take  part 
in  the 
relocation  of  inhabitants  in  accordance  with  socio-economic 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

95 

development plans, forming groups of villages and communes 
in  the  border  regions  corresponding  to  the  all-people  national 
defence  posture  for  the  protection  of  the  Homeland.  The 
economic-defence  corps  have  closely  cooperated  with  local 
governments,  socio-political  organisations  and  other  forces  in 
the  areas  to  educate  and  mobilise  people  to  carry  out  the 
Party’s guidelines and the State’s laws and policies. They have 
contributed to developing culture, medical care and education 
and    helped  improve  and  train  the  cadre  contingents  for 
localities.  In  the  past  years,  the  economic-defence  corps  have 
participated  in  building  new-style  rural  areas,  taken  part  in 
resettlement  programmes,  built  hundreds  of  groups  of  new 
mountainous villages, sponsored and organised the permanent 
agriculture and settlement for tens of thousands of households, 
and generated jobs for ethnic minority people.  

1.5.  Guidelines  for  Building  the  Viet  Nam  People's 

Army 

Viet  Nam  advocates  building  the  revolutionary,  regular, 
highly-skilled,  gradually  modernised  VPA  with  some  forces 
advancing  straight  to  modernity  and  gradually  formulating 
the  Army  as  an  independent  Service,  meeting  requirements 
of safeguarding the Homeland and responding to hi-tech wars. 
On  the  basis  of  the  country's  conditions  and  potentialities, 
Viet  Nam  strives,  from  2030  onward,  to  build  the  VPA  into 
a  modern  military  both  in  personnel,  organisation  and 
equipment,  unceasingly  improving  military  and  political 
knowledge and professional skills, the military art, modes of 
warfare,  weapons  and  technical  equipment  and  support 

96 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

work. Viet Nam focuses on building the VPA strong in politics, 
laying  a  solid  foundation  for  improving  comprehensive 
quality,  strength  and  combat  readiness  as  well  as  completing 
the construction of the modes and mechanisms to enhance the 
comprehensive  leadership  and  combat  strength  of  the 
Military Party Committee. 

The  VPA  is  to  adjust  its  organisation,  structure  and 
equipment in conformity with the military art and weaponry, 
meeting  the  requirements  of  combat  readiness  and  combat  
in  any  situations.  Priority  is  given  to  providing  sufficient 
manpower for combat units in vital areas, borders, seas and 
islands.  The  VPA  plans  to  reorganise  the  military  academy 
and school system in the direction of reducing the number of 
subordinate units, renovating training contents, programmes 
and training facilities, promoting the application of information 
technology, improving the education and training quality in 
close  combination  with  higher  combat  readiness  and  practical 
experiences.  

1.5.1. Building Political-Spiritual Strength 

Making the VPA strong in politics and spirit is a matter of 
principle of the VPA's organisation and operation, manifesting 
the viewpoint of regarding humans as the determinant factor in 
the  battlefield  and  is  aimed  at  strengthening  the  CPV’s 
leadership  and  the  state  management  effectiveness  and 
maintaining the working class nature, the national and people’s 
characteristics of the VPA.  

The  VPA  shall  be  made  strong  in  politics,  ideology  and 
organisation, unwaveringly loyal to the CPV, the Homeland 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

97 

and  the  people,  and  absolutely  confident  in  the  CPV’s 
leadership  and  the  state  management,  the  renovation  cause 
and the path to the socialism in Viet Nam. At the same time, 
the  VPA  is  to  raise  the  sense  of  vigilance  to  defeat  the 
"peaceful  evolution"  and  riot  and  subversion  activities  and 
plot of "depoliticising the military" of the hostile forces. It is 
also strongly attached to the people and ready to sacrifice for 
the independence and freedom of the Homeland, and for the 
happiness of the people. 

The VPA is determined to build and bring into full play 
the  role  of  political  units  and  political  officers  at  all  levels, 
innovate and raise the quality and effectiveness of the Party 
and political work, pay due attention to officer development, 
especially  those  at  operational  and  strategic  levels.  It  shall 
regularly  perform  well  the  work  of  protection  of  internal 
politics, inspection and supervision work, preventing hostile 
forces from penetrating, infiltrating,  sabotaging and stealing 
military secrets.  

1.5.2.  Organisational  Structure,  Equipment,  and 

Human Resource Development 

The  VPA  shall  be  organised  and  built  in  accordance  with 
the  CPV's  viewpoints  and  the  guidelines  of  the  all-people 
national defence and the people's war, ensuring a synchronous 
balance  between  the  Main  Force,  Local  Force  and  Militia  and 
Self-Defence  Force,  between  Active  Force  and  the  Reserve, 
between  combat  force  and  combat  support  force,  between 
Ground  Forces  and  other  services  and  arms,  and  between  the 
total strength and the inventories of weapons and equipment.  

98 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

The  VPA  shall  ensure  the  invesment  of  resources  to 

achieve the goal of building the military, critical programmes 

and projects, improving the quality of human resources and 

technical  infrastructures,  conducting  research  and  application 

of advanced science and technology, mastering technologies 

to  manufacture  some  modern  weapons  and  equipment  for 

the  Ground  Forces,  services  and  arms,  and  moving  toward 

designing  and  manufacturing  some  strategic  weapons  and 

equipment. 

1.5.3. Education, Training and Drilling 

In parallel with political-spiritual work, the VPA always 

pays special attention to education, training and conducting 

exercises.  Therefore, 

the  VPA  shall  regularly  and 

comprehensively  renovate  education,  training  and  drilling, 

consonant with the organisational structure, equipment, and the 

development of Vietnamese military art.  

Great  importance  is  attached  to  training  and  fostering 

leaders  and  commanders  with  political  steadfastness,  good 

virtues, thoroughly grasping the military art, including that of 

services and  arms, the Main Force's army corps and the local 

people's  warfare  (operations  of  provincial  and  municipal 

defence zones) in all types of operation in the war to safeguard 

the  Homeland.  The  VPA 

is  to  develop  comprehensive 

capability  of  leadership,  command,  management,  education, 

and  performance  of  the  Party  and  political  work,  arming  its 

forces  with  essential  knowledge  of  military  science  and 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

99 

technology,  information  technology,  foreign  languages,  and 

legal  and social matters so as to  meet  specific  requirements at 

various levels. 

Special  attention  is  paid  to  the  training  of  individual 

combat skills, combined operations and making the best use 

of  existing weapons and  equipment  through  the  application 

of  Vietnamese  military  art  along  the  “basic,  practical,  and 

solid”  motto.  The  VPA  seeks  to  innovate  training  contents, 

programmes 

and  methods 

in 

conformity  with 

the 

organisational  structure,  equipment  and  practical  conditions 

of  each  unit,  meeting  the  requirement  of  combat  readiness 

for defending the country in the new situation. 

Regular  military  exercises  are  conducted 

to 

train 

commanders and organisations comprehensively in leadership, 

command  and  control  over  forces,  improving  the  ability  to 

organise,  command,  coordinate  combat  operations,  and  settle 

strategic  scenarios,  and  perfect  operational  plans,  meeting  the 

demands of the new situation.  

Viet  Nam  advocates  participating 

in  exercises  and 

training  activities  with  foreign  partners  to  respond  to  non-

traditional  security  challenges  and  search  and  rescue 

requirements,  as  well  as  those  of  Humanitarian  Assistance 

and  Disaster  Relief  (HADR)  on  the  basis  of  respecting  each 

other's  independence,  territorial  sovereignty,  and  mutual 

national  interests  in  conformity  with  international  law  and 

Viet  Nam's  laws,  conditions  and  capabilities,  serving  to 

promote cooperation and contributing to peace and stability 

in the region and the world. 

100 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

1.5.4. Scientific Research  

The  VPA's  scientific  research  activities  cover  military  art, 

military  social  sciences  and  humanities,  military  logistics  and 

military technology. 

The  VPA  attaches  importance  to  consolidating  and 

raising awareness of Marxism-Leninism, President Ho Chi 

Minh's Thought, and the CPV's viewpoints and guidelines. 

It advances the education of its forces for the loyalty to the 

Party,  State  and  people,  fostering  the  readiness  to  sacrifice 

for the independence and freedom of the Homeland.  

The  VPA  advocates  promoting  the  research  and 

development of the Vietnamese military art and the theory of 

the people's war in the new conditions so as to win any new 

forms of warfare. The VPA also pays due attention to research 

on  the  organisation  and  preparation  for  conducting  war, 

guiding lines of thought, principles, and art of conducting war 

and strategic art, as well as the building of the armed forces. It 

seeks  to  mobilise  and  make  the  best  use  of  the  nation's 

resources  and  potentialities  to  win  wars.  Research  efforts  are 

invested in theories and practice for preparation and conduct 

of campaigns (battles) in the war to safeguard the Homeland. 

The VPA shall focus efforts on specialised theoretical and 

practical  research,  mobilising  potential,  improving  mobility, 

transportation, daily necessities, medical and fuel support, to 

name just a few. Research is also focused on the application 

of  information  technology,  automation,  exploitation  and 

mastery  of  high  technologies  and  modern  weapons  and 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

101 

equipment,  overhauling,  upgrading  and  manufacturing 

military  weapons  and  equipment  to  win  hi-tech  wars,  and 

improving  the  combat  readiness  and  combat  capability  to 

ensure the victory in any conditions, meeting the demands of 

safeguarding the Homeland in the new situation. 

1.5.5. Weapons, Technical and Logistical Equipment 

Weapons,  technical  and  logistical  equipment  play  a  very 

important  role  in  modern  wars.  Despite  being  a  developing 

country  with  a  limited  level  of  science  and  technology,  the 

State of Viet Nam attaches special importance to providing the 

VPA  with  weapons  and  technical  equipment  necessary  for 

safeguarding the Homeland.  

The  VPA,  therefore,  shall  promote  the  practice  of  good 

preservation,  maintenance  and  selective  upgrade  of    existing  

weapon  inventories.  Sufficient  investments  shall  be  made 

in  self-production  of  some  weapons  and  equipment 

corresponding to the indigenous technology, and at the same 

time,  acquisition  of  some  advanced  weapons  and  technical 

equipment  to  meet  the  demands  of  strengthening  the  VPA's 

combat  power.  It  shall  continue  the  organisational  reforms 

and  the  improvement  of  logistics  and  technical  support 

modes,  with  a  view  to  developing  a  chain  of  key  regional 

logistics  supply  centres 

in  combination  with 

logistics 

outsourcing. It is committed to effectively using and focusing 

investment  resources  on  developing  defence  potential  and 

actively  participating 

in  economic  development  of  the 

country. 

102 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

1.5.6. National Defence Industry  

Viet  Nam’s  national  defence  industry  is  a  component  of 

the  national  industry,  which  is  built  and  developed  in  the 

direction  of  gradual  integration  into  the  national  industry, 

contributing  to  the  national 

industrial  development. 

Viet  Nam  advocates  building  and  developing  the  national 

defence industry to achieve modern and advanced scientific 

and technical levels, contributing to the VPA's modernisation 

process, serving to improve the VPA's combat readiness and 

combat  power,  meeting  the  demands  of  strengthening  the 

national defence and security potential. Viet Nam’s national 

defence  industry  is  geared  to  the  application  of  advanced 

scientific and technological achievements, especially those of 

the Fourth Industrial Revolution, to improve the capabilities 

of  research,  design,  manufacture,  maintenance,  upgrading 

and  modernising  weapons  and  technical  equipment  with 

high specifications. 

Viet  Nam  advocates  building  and  developing  the 

national defence industry with consonant organisation, scale 

and management system to ensure the centrality and unity of 

the  state  management,  bringing  into  full  play  the  role  and 

self-reliance  of  the  national  defence  industry  establishments 

and  the  active  and  efficient  participation  of  other  national 

economic  elements.  Viet  Nam  also  advocates  promoting  the 

national  defence  industry  development  in  the  direction  of 

dual use so as to make it a key national industry. Viet Nam's 

national  defence  industry  works  to  have  international 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

103 

competitive  capacity  and  deeply  join  the  global  value  chain 

by  2030.  The  national  defence  industry's  key  establishments 

in  the  Northern,  Central  and  Southern  regions  will  be 

properly  rearranged  to  suit  the  defense  posture  of  the 

country.  Viet  Nam  promotes  international  cooperation  on 

education  and  training,  research,  manufacture  and  market 

for  defence  products.  Viet  Nam  advocates  multilateralising 

and  diversifying  the  cooperation  and  acquisition  of  military 

weapons and equipment, meeting the criteria of quality and 

cost  and  technology  mastery,  so  as  to  ensure  the  combat 

readiness  and    way  of  fighting  in  all  forms  of  warfare  to 

safeguard the Homeland. 

1.5.7. Building and Developing Military Technology  

Coupled  with  the  development  of  military  science,  the 

military  technology  branch  is  also  bringing  into  full  play  the 

tradition  of  “proactiveness,  creativeness,  self-reliance  and 

resilience”  in  the  research,  development  and  application  of 

new  technologies.  It  aims  to  advance  the  application  of 

information  technology,  automation,  the  exploitation  and 

mastery  of  high  technologies  and  modern  weapons  and 

equipment  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  and  final  victory, 

meeting  the  demands  of  conducting  the  people’s  war  to 

safeguard  the  Homeland  when  the  enemy  uses  high-tech 

weaponry.  Viet  Nam  will  focus  investment  and  resources  on 

fulfilling the goal of building a revolutionary, regular, highly-

skilled, and gradually modernised VPA. 

104 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

2. MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE 

2.1.  History  of  the  Foundation  and  Development  of 

the Militia and Self-Defence Force 

On  28  March  1935,  the  1st  National  Congress  of  the 
Indochina  Communist  Party  issued  “the  Resolution  on  Self-
Defence  Teams”,  marking  the  foundation  of  Viet  Nam’s 
Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force.  Over  the  past  80  years,  the 
development  history  of  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force 
linked  to  the  struggle  for  national 
has  been  closely 
the  Homeland’s  construction  and 
independence,  and 
protection.  From  1935  to  1945,  self-defence  teams  in  both 
rural  and  urban  areas  came  into  being,  becoming  core 
elements  for  the  masses  to  conduct  armed  uprisings  and 
guerrilla warfare, contributing to the building and expansion 
of  revolutionary  bases.  In  August  1945,  the  Militia  and  Self-
Defence  Force  together  with  the  whole  people  successfully 
carried  out  the  General  Uprising  to  seize  power.  After  2 
September  1945,  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force,  one  of 
the  people’s  three-category  armed  forces,  was  organised 
nationwide,  truly  becoming  an  instrument  to  protect  the 
fledgling  revolutionary  government  and  the  revolutionary 
achievements. 

In  the  resistance  war  against  the  French  colonialists,  the 
Militia and Self-Defence Force was gradually restructured to 
become  organisationally  unified  under  the  guidance  and 
command of communal militia command boards and district 
and  provincial  military  commands,  and  placed  under  direct 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

105 

the  expeditionary 

leadership  of  the  CPV’s  committees  at  various  levels.  Being 
equipped  only  with  rudimentary,  improvised  weapons, 
facing 
forces  armed  with  modern 
weapons,  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  together  with 
the  people  formed  combat  villages,  steadfastly  held  the 
ground,  and  stuck  fast  to  the  people  to  stage  the  war  of 
attrition,  destroying  the  puppet  regime,  eliminating  traitors, 
and  actively  cooperating  with  regular  troops  to  counter  the 
enemy’s  "cordon  and  search"  and  besieging  operations.  By 
conducting  various  ingenious,  flexible  and  creative  ways  of 
fighting,  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  caused  many 
enemies  to  surrender  and  withdraw  their  military  posts, 
expanded  the  guerrilla  bases,  and  contained  and  stretched 
enemy  forces,  compelling  them  to  disperse  for  response, 
joining  the  Main  Force  in  successfully 
facilitating  and 
conducting  many  major  campaigns,  culminating  in  the 
historic Dien Bien Phu victory.  

In the national salvation war against American aggressors, 
the  North  Viet  Nam’s  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  was 
developed  extensively,  reaching  every  hamlet,  commune, 
construction  site,  state-run  farm,  factory,  and  enterprise.  It 
was then equipped with relatively modern weapons, forming 
flying 
an  anti-aircraft  network  against  enemy’s 
airplanes,  which  shot  down  many  enemy aircraft,  capturing 
alive  many  US  pilots,  wiping  out  tens  of  enemy  commando 
groups,  and  sinking  and  damaging  many  enemy  warships. 
The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  also  performed  well  the 
task  of  people’s  air-defence  at  the  grassroots,  built  a  variety 
of  air-raid  shelters,  dealt  with  damage  caused  by  enemy’s 

low 

106 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

air-raids,  cleared  unexploded  bombs  and  mines,  and  broke 
naval  blockades.  Tens  of  millions  of  people  were  mobilised 
for  transportation  and  combat  service,  helping  evacuate 
people  and  overcome  the  consequences  of  war,  and 
effectively  reinforcing  manpower  and  materials  for  the 
Southern front. 

The  Militia  and  Guerrilla  Forces  in  South  Viet  Nam 
bravely fought against the enemy with all kinds of available 
weapons,  using  various  and  creative  ways  of  fighting 
three  strategic  regions,  closely  combining 
throughout 
political  with  armed  struggles,  holding  on  resiliently, 
creating  an  interlocked  pattern  between  our  forces  and  the 
enemy’s, compelling them to stretch their forces. In the 1975 
Spring General Offensive, the Militia and Self-Defence Force 
together  with  the  Main  Force,  Local  Force,  and  the  entire 
people in South Viet Nam launched simultaneous offensives 
and  uprisings,  liberating  the  whole  of  South  Viet  Nam  and 
achieving the national reunification. 

After  the  great  victory  in  the  spring  of  1975,  the  Militia 
and  Self-Defence  Force  was  mobilised  to  take  part  in  the 
construction of the border defence line, directly engaging in 
combat  and  combat  service  in  the  wars  to  safeguard  the 
Homeland in Northern and Southwestern borders. A number 
of Militia and Self-Defence Force units achieved excellent feat 
of  arms,  decimating  the  enemy  troops,  protecting  people  in 
villages,  construction  sites,  state-run  farms,  and  enterprises, 
closely  coordinating  with  the  VPA  to  steadfastly  fight  and 
defeat the enemy attacks, making important contributions to 
the success of the wars to safeguard the Homeland. 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

107 

Nowadays, 

the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  has 
developed  in  quality,  quantity,  organisational  structure,  and 
equipment  with  appropriate  organisation  and  strength.  The 
Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force's  comprehensive  quality  has 
been  improved  to  meet  the  demands  of  building  and 
safeguarding  the Homeland in the new  situation. The  Militia 
and Self-Defence Force continues to be the cornerstone for the 
people  in  localities  to  overcome  the  consequences  of  war, 
actively  collaborating  with  other  forces  for  the  clearance  of 
unexploded  ordnances  to  return  millions  of  hectares  of 
cultivated land for production. 

Over 80 years of construction, combat and development, 
generations  of  cadres  and  members  of  the  Militia  and  Self-
Defence Force have shown absolute loyalty to the Homeland, 
the  people,  and  the  revolutionary  cause  of  the  CPV, 
combating  resiliently,  ingeniously  and  bravely,  labouring, 
studying  and  working  effectively  and  creatively,  and 
gaining great achievements for which it was awarded the 
Gold Star Order. Many Militia and Self-Defence Force units 
and  individuals  have  been  awarded  the  title  of  Hero  of 
the People’s Armed Forces.  

2.2. Functions and Missions of the Militia and Self-

Defence Force 

The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force,  a  component  of  the 
people’s armed forces of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, 
is  the  mass  armed  force  not  detached  from  production  and 
work, protecting local CPV's organisations, authorities, lives 
and property of people and public property, standing ready 

108 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

to fight, fighting and providing combat support, and playing 
the  role  as  the  core  force  together  with  the  entire  people  in 
fighting against the enemies  in  their  localities  and workplaces 
when a war breaks out.  

The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  is  a  core  force  in 

production  activities  and  work,  and  a  vanguard  force  in 

protecting  production  activities,  preventing  and  overcoming 

the  aftermaths  of  natural  disasters,  epidemics;  fulfilling  the 

task  of  search  and  rescue,  protecting  forest  and  preventing 

forest  fire,  and  preserving  the  environment;  participating  in 

building  the  all-people  national  defence,  defence  zones,  and 

civil  defence;  protecting  national  security,  ensuring  social 

order and safety, and preventing and fighting crime.  

In  peacetime,  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  shall 

closely collaborate with the VPA to build a strong and stable 

national  defence  posture  and  with  the  people's  public 

security and other forces to maintain political security, social 

order and safety in designated areas. It shall also coordinate 

with the Border Guard, the Navy and Viet Nam Coast Guard 

to firmly protect sovereignty, territorial integrity and border 

security of the country. 

In  wartime,  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  becomes 

the strategic force in carrying out people’s war, acting as the 

core  force  in  the  movement  of  fighting  the  enemy  by  the 

whole  people,  directly  participating  in  combat  and  combat 

service, coordinating with other forces to protect the locality 

pursuant to the operational plan of the defence zone. 

Part three: THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY...   

109 

2.3.  Organisation  of  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence 

Force 

Militia units are organised in communes, wards or district 

towns  (commonly  referred  to  as  communes).  Self-Defence 

units  are  organised  in  political,  socio-political  bodies,  State 

offices,  civil  services  and  economic  organisations  (commonly 

referred to as offices and organisations). The Militia and Self-

Defence  Force  is  composed  of  the  core  force  and  the  broad 

force. The core one is composed of relevant forces in infantry, 

air-defence,  artillery,  engineering,  reconnaissance,  signal, 

chemical  protection,  medical  care,  and  maritime  Militia  and 

Self-Defence  Force.  The  mobile,  on-the-spot  and  permanent 

forces of the Militia and Self-Defence Force are organised into 

squads  (batteries),  platoons,  companies  (squadrons),  battalions 

(flotillas),  and  equipped  with  appropriate  weapons.  The 

Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  is  provided  with  regulated 

programmes of political education and military training.  

The  organisation,  command  and  operation  of  the  Militia 
and Self-Defence Force must abide by the Constitution and the 
laws.  The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  relies  on  the  people 
and  promotes  the  overall  power  of  the  entire  people  and  the 
political system to perform their tasks. The Minister of National 
Defence  and  chiefs  of  military  commands  at  various  levels 
exercise  command  over  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  as 
stipulated  by  the  Law  on  National  Defence.  Activities  of  the 
Militia and Self-Defence Force are carried out according to the 
plans  of  commune-level  military  commanders  and  militia 
command  boards,  military  command  boards  of  offices  and 

110 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

organisations,  under  the  direct  leadership  and  guidance  of 
relevant  CPV’s  committees  and  administrative  authorities  at 
the grass-roots level. 

2.4.  Guidelines  for  Building  the  Militia  and  Self-

Defence Force 

The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  shall  be  built  in  the 
direction  of  “robustness  and  extensiveness”,  with  appropriate 
quantity,  high  overall  quality,  political  steadfastness,  consistent 
in  the  goal  of  national  independence  and  socialism.  It  is 
organised 
in  an  adept,  compact,  cohesive  direction  and 
equipped with increasingly advanced weapons and equipment. 
The  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  shall  unceasingly  improve 
the  training  quality  of  military  communal  commanders, 
providing continuous education and training for its cadres and 
members.  Simultaneously,  it  shall  strengthen  the  role  of 
leadership  and  guidance  of  local  CPV’s  committees  and 
administrative authorities, heads of agencies and organisations 
in  charge  of  the  Militia  and  Self-Defence  Force  affairs  in 
conformity with the laws, ensuring that this force is capable of 
fulfilling successfully its tasks and playing a pivotal role in the 
protection of the CPV, State and people.  

CONCLUSION 

V 

iet Nam's 2019 National Defence White Paper expresses 
the  viewpoints,  assessments  and  predictions  of  the 
global,  regional  and  domestic  situations  relating  to  Viet 
Nam's  defence  challenges.  It  elaborates  on  fundamental 
issues of Viet Nam’s national defence policy and the changes 
in  organisation  and  equipment  of  the  VPA  and  the  Militia 
and  Self-Defence  Force.  The  information  provided  in  the 
Paper  shows  the  CPV  and  State  of  Viet  Nam's  advocacy  of 
transparency  of  the  national  defence  policy,  aimed  at 
promoting  mutual  understanding  and  confidence-building 
between the VPA, and Vietnamese people and militaries and 
people  around  the  world,  facilitating  the  improvement  of 
integration  and  defence 
effectiveness  of 
cooperation between Viet Nam and other countries as well as 
regional  and 
to  deal  with 
international  organisations 
emerging  security  issues  for  the  sake  of  peace,  stability, 
cooperation, and development.  

international 

In the unpredictable and complicated security situation in 
the  region  and  the  world,  which  has  far-reaching  effects  on 
Viet  Nam's  national  defence  and  security,  Viet  Nam's  2019 
National  Defence  White  Paper  clearly  shows  the  CPV  and 
State  of  Viet  Nam's  determination  to  continue  pursuing  a 

 
112 

2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

national  defence policy  of  peace  and  self-defence.  Viet  Nam 
is resolute and consistent in settling disputes and differences 
with other countries through peaceful means on the basis of 
international law. At the same time, Viet Nam advocates the 
consolidation  and  enhancement  of  the  national  defence 
strength  of  which  the  military  strength  plays  a  core  part, 
ensuring  sufficient capabilities for deterrence and defeating 
any acts of aggression and war. In the future, the VPA will be 
invested  with  necessary  resources  to  continue  playing  the 
central  role  in  the  all-people  national  defence,  being  made 
strong enough to protect independence, sovereignty, territorial 
unity and integrity, national interests, and the socialist regime. 
Viet  Nam  accelerates  international  integration  and  defence 
diplomacy, seeking long-term solutions to settle disputes and 
differences  through  peaceful  means,  and  contributing  to 
maintaining peace, stability and prosperity in the region and 
the world. 

The  publication  of  the  2019  National  Defence  White 
Paper expresses Viet Nam’s desire and determination for the 
development  of  friendship,  cooperation,  and  equal  relations 
with all countries on the basis of mutual respect for the sake 
of  peace,  national  independence,  democracy,  and  social 
progress. 

 
APPENDIX

 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX   

115 

I

I

I

L
A
N
O
T
A
N
F
O
Y
R
T
S
N
M
E
H
T
F
O
E
R
U
T
C
U
R
T
S
D
N
A
N
O
T
A
S
N
A
G
R
O

I

I

E
C
N
E
F
E
D

1

x
i
d
n
e
p
p
A

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Appendix 2 

BORDER AGREEMENTS BETWEEN 
THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM 
AND ITS NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES 

I. Viet Nam-China Land Border Agreements  

1.  Temporary  Agreement  on  the  Settlement  of  Border 
Affairs between the Government of the Socialist Republic of 
Viet  Nam  and  the  Government  of  the  People’s  Republic  of 
China, signed on 7 November 1991.   

2.  Agreement  on  Fundamental  Principles  Governing  the 
Solution  of  Border  and  Territorial  Issues  between  the 
Government  of  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the 
Government of the People’s Republic of China, signed on 19 
October 1993.  

3.  Land  Border  Treaty  between  the  Socialist  Republic  of 
Viet  Nam  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  signed  on  30 
December  1999,  which  has  officially  come  into  force  as  of  6 
July 2000. 

4.  Viet  Nam-China  Protocol  on  Border  Demarcation  and 
Marker  Planting;  Agreement  on  Viet  Nam-China  Border 
Management;  Viet  Nam-China  Agreement  on  Border  Gates 
and Border Gate Management, 19 November 2009 (three Viet 
Nam-China  land  border  documents  for  short,  which  have 
officially come into force as of 14 July 2010). 

 
APPENDIX   

117 

5.  Agreement  on  Free  Travel  of  Ships  at  the  Bac 
Luan/Beilun  River  Estuary  between  the  Government  of  the 
Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Government  of  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China,  signed  on  5  November  2015, 
which has officially come into force as of 16 June 2016.   

6.  Agreement  on  Cooperation  in  the  Protection  and 
Exploitation of Tourist Potential around the Ban Gioc/Detian 
Waterfall  between  the  Government  of  the  Socialist  Republic 
of Viet Nam and the Government of the People’s Republic of 
China, signed on 5 November 2015, which has officially come 
into force as of June 2016.  

II. Viet Nam-Laos Land Border Agreements 

1.  Treaty  on  National  Border  Demarcation  between  the 
Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Lao  People’s 
Democratic Republic, signed on 18 July 1977.   

2. Supplementary Treaty to Treaty of National Boundary 
Delimitation;  Protocol  on  Border  Demarcation  on  Field  and 
Border  Marker  Planting  between  the  Socialist  Republic  of 
Viet Nam and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, signed 
on 24 January 1986.  

3.  Supplementary  Protocol  to  Protocol  between  the 
Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Lao  People’s 
Democratic  Republic  on  Border  Demarcation  on  Field  and 
Border Marker Planting, signed on 24 January 1986.   

4.  Agreement  on  National  Border  between  the  Socialist 
Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic 
Republic, signed on 1 March 1990. 

5.  Amended  and  Supplementary  Protocol 

the 
Agreement on National Border between the Socialist Republic 

to 

118 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic  Republic, 
signed 31 August 1997.  

6.  Supplementary  Treaty  to  Border  Delimitation  Treaty 
between  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Lao 
People’s Democratic Republic regarding the Revision of the 
Starting Point of the Two Countries’ Boundary Line, signed 
on 16 November 2007.  

7.  Treaty  on  the  Determination  of  Intersection  Point  of 
Land Border between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, the 
Kingdom  of  Cambodia,  and  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic 
Republic, signed on 26 August 2008. 

8.  Protocol  on  Boundary  Line  and  Border  Markers 
between  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Lao 
People’s  Democratic  Republic,  signed  on  16  March  2016, 
which has officially come into force as of 5 September 2017. 

9.  Agreement  between  the  Government  of  the  Socialist 
Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Government  of  the  Lao 
People’s  Democratic  Republic  on  Land  Border  and  Land 
Border Gate Management, signed on 16 March 2016.  

III. Viet Nam-Cambodia Land Border Agreements 

1. Treaty of Peace, Friendship, and Cooperation between 
the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Kingdom  of 
Cambodia, signed on 18 February 1979. 

2.  Treaty  on  Principles  Governing  the  Settlement  of 
Border  Issues;  Agreement  on  Border  between  the  Socialist 
Republic of Viet Nam and the Kingdom of Cambodia, signed 
on 20 July 1983. 

3.  Treaty  on  Border  Delimitation  between  the  Socialist 
Republic of Viet Nam and the Kingdom of Cambodia, signed 
on 27 December 1985. 

APPENDIX   

119 

4.  Supplementary  Treaty  to  Viet  Nam-Cambodia  Treaty 

of Border Delimitation, signed on 10 October 2005. 

5.  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  Land  Border 
Adjustment in Remaining Areas between the Government of 
the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and 
the  Royal 
Government of Cambodia, signed on 23 April 2011. 

IV. Viet Nam-Laos-China Land Border Agreement 

Treaty on the Determination of Intersection Point of Land 
Border  between  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam,  the  Lao 
People’s  Democratic  Republic,  and  the  People’s  Republic  of 
China, signed on 10 October 2006. 

V. Viet Nam-Laos-Cambodia Land Border Agreement 

Treaty on the Determination of Intersection Point of Land 
Border  between  the  Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam,  the 
Kingdom  of  Cambodia,  and  the  Lao  People’s  Democratic 
Republic, signed on 26 August 2008. 

VI. Maritime Border Agreements 

1.  Agreement  on  the  Historic  Waters  between  the 
Socialist  Republic of  Viet Nam and the People’s Republic of 
Cambodia, signed on 7 July 1982.  

2. Agreement on Joint Exploration and Exploitation in the 
Vietnamese-Malaysian  overlapping  area,  signed  on  5  June 
1992. 

3.  Viet  Nam-Philippines  Agreement  on  Principles  of 

Conduct in the Spratlys, signed in November 1995. 

4. Agreement on the Delimitation of Maritime Boundaries 
between  the  Government  of  the  Socialist  Republic  of 

120 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Viet Nam and the Government of the Kingdom of Thailand, 
signed on 9 August 1997. 

5. Seismic Survey Agreement in the Spratlys between the 
Socialist  Republic  of  Viet  Nam,  the  People’s  Republic  of 
China,  and  the  Republic  of  the  Philippines,  signed  on  14 
March 2005.  

 6. Vietnamese-Malaysian Memorandum of Understanding 
on the Creation of a Joint Submission according to Article 76 of 
the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and 
Joint Survey, signed on 27 February 2009. 

7.  Agreement  on  the Delimitation  of  the  Territorial  Seas, 
the  Exclusive  Economic  Zones  and  Continental  Shelves  in 
Bac Bo Gulf/Beibu Bay between the Socialist Republic of Viet 
Nam  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  signed  on  25 
December 2000;  

8.  Agreement  on  Fishing  Cooperation 

in  Bac  Bo 
Gulf/Beibu  Bay  between  the  Government  of  the  Socialist 
Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  Government  of  the  People’s 
Republic of China, signed on 25 December 2000. 

9.  Agreement  on  Fundamental  Principles  Governing  the 
Settlement  of  Sea  Related  Issues  between  the  Socialist 
Republic  of  Viet  Nam  and  the  People’s  Republic  of  China, 
signed on 11 October 2011. 

10.  Agreement  on  the  Delimitation  of  the  Continental 
Shelf between the Government of the Socialist Republic of 
Viet  Nam  and  the  Government  of  Republic  of  Indonesia, 
signed on 26 June 2003. 

APPENDIX   

121 

Appendix 3 

INTERNATIONAL TREATIES REGARDING 
NATIONAL DEFENCE RATIFIED BY VIET NAM 

No. 

Conventions 

1  Protocol  for  the  Prohibition  of  the  Use 

in  War  of 
Asphyxiating,  Poisonous  or  Other  Gases,  and  of 
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare (in 1925) 

2  Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed 

on Board Aircraft (in 1963) 

3  Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (in 1968) 

4  Convention  for  the  Suppression  of  Unlawful  Seizure  of 

Aircraft (in 1970) 

5  Convention  for  the  Suppression  of  Unlawful  Acts  against 

the Safety of Civil Aviation (in 1971) 

6  Treaty  on  the  Prohibition  of  the  Emplacement  of  Nuclear 
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction on the Sea-
bed and the Ocean Floor and in the Subsoil Thereof (in 1971) 

7  Convention  on 

the  Development, 
Production  and  Stockpiling  of  Bacteriological  (Biological) 
and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction (in 1972) 

the  Prohibition  of 

8  Convention  on  the  Prevention  and  Punishment  of  Crimes 
including 
Internationally  Protected  Persons, 

against 
Diplomatic Agents (in 1973) 

122 

No. 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Conventions 

9  Convention  on  the  Physical  Protection  of  Nuclear  Material 

(in 1979) 

10  International Convention Against the Taking of Hostages (in 

1979) 

11  Convention  on  Prohibitions  or  Restrictions  on  the  Use  of 
Certain  Conventional  Weapons  which  may  be  deemed  to  be 
Excessively Injurious or to have Indiscriminate Effects (in 1980) 

12  Protocol on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at 

Airports Serving International Civil Aviation (in 1988) 

13  Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety 
of Fixed Platforms located on the Continental Shelf (in 1988) 

14  Convention  on 

the  Development, 
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and 
on their Destruction (in 1993) 

the  Prohibition  of 

15  Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (in 1996) 

16  International  Convention  for  the  Suppression  of  Terrorist 

Bombings (in 1997) 

17  International  Convention 

for 
Financing of Terrorism (in 1999) 

the  Suppression  of 

the 

18  Convention  for  the  Suppression  of  Unlawful  Acts  of 
Violence against the Safety of Maritime Navigation (in 2005) 

19  ASEAN Convention on Counter Terrorism (in 2007) 

20  Convention on Nuclear Safety (in 1994) 

APPENDIX   

123 

Appendix 4 

TRADITIONAL DAYS OF  
MAJOR AGENCIES AND UNITS 

No. 

Unit 

Traditional Day 

1  Viet Nam People’s Army  

22 December 1944 

2  General Staff  

7 September 1945 

3  General Political Department 

22 December 1944 

4  General Department of Logistics 

11 July 1950 

5  General Department of Technology 

10 September 1974 

6  General Department of Defence 

15 September 1945 

Industry 

7  General Department of Defence 

25 October 1945 

Intelligence 

8 

1st Military Region 

16 October 1945 

9 

2nd Military Region 

19 October 1946 

10  3rd Military Region 

31 October 1945 

11  4th Military Region 

15 October 1945 

12  5th Military Region 

16 October 1945 

13  7th Military Region 

10 December 1945 

14  9th Military Region 

10 December 1945 

124 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

15  Hanoi Capital High Command 

19 August 1945 

16  Air Defence-Air Force 

22 October 1963 

17  Navy  

18  Border Guard 

7 May 1955 

3 March 1959 

19  Coast Guard  

28 August 1998 

20  1st Army Corps 

24 October 1973 

21  2nd Army Corps 

17 May 1974 

22  3rd Army Corps 

26 March 1975 

23  4th Army Corps 

20 July 1974 

24  Engineering 

25  Commando 

26  Chemical 

27  Artillery 

25 March 1946 

19 March 1967 

19 April 1958 

29 June 1946 

28  Tank-Armour 

5 October 1959 

29  Signal 

9 September 1945 

30  Cyber Command 

15 August 2017 

31  Foreign Relations Department 

28 May 1964 

32  Viet Nam’s Peacekeeping Department  27 May 2014 

 
APPENDIX   

125 

Appendix 5 

LIST OF ECONOMIC-DEFENCE ZONES 
AND ECONOMIC-DEFENCE CORPS 

No. 

Economic-Defence Zones 

1  Mau Son Economic-Defence Zone, 

Lang Son Province 

Economic-Defence 
Corps 
338th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

2  Bao  Lac  -  Bao  Lam  Economic-
Defence Zone, Cao Bang Province 

799th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

3  Thong Nong - Ha Quang Economic-
Defence Zone, Cao Bang Province  

799th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

4  Vi  Xuyen  Economic-Defence  Zone, 

Ha Giang Province 

313rd  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

5  Xin Man Economic-Defence Zone, 

Ha Giang Province 

313rd  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

6  Bat  Xat  Economic-Defence  Zone, 

Lao Cai Province 

345th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

7  Phong 

Tho 
Zone, Lai Chau Province 

Economic-Defence 

356th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

8  Muong  Cha  Economic-Defence 

Zone, Dien Bien Province 

379th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

9  Song Ma Economic-Defence Zone, 

Son La Province 

326th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

126 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

No. 

Economic-Defence Zones 

Economic-Defence 
Corps 

10  Bac  Hai  Son  Economic-Defence 
Zone, Quang Ninh Province 

42nd  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

11  Binh Lieu - Quang Ha - Mong Cai 
Economic-Defence  Zone,  Quang 
Ninh Province 

327th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

12  Group  of  North  East 

Islands 
Economic-Defence  Zone,  Quang 
Ninh Province 

327th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

13  Muong  Lat  Economic-Defence 

Zone, Thanh Hoa Province 

5th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

14  Ky  Son  -  Que  Phong  Economic-
Defence Zone, Nghe An Province 

4th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

15  Khe 

Sanh 

Economic-Defence 

Zone, Quang Tri Province 

337th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

16  Aso  -  Aluoi  Economic-Defence 

Zone, Thua Thien - Hue Province 

92nd  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

17  Tay  Giang  -  Nam  Giang  Economic-
Defence Zone, Quang Nam Province 

207th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

18  Cumga  Economic-Defence  Zone, 

15th Coffee Company 

Dak Nong Province 

19  Quang  Son  Economic-Defence 

Zone, Dak Nong Province 

Quang  Son  Economic-
Defence Corps 

APPENDIX   

127 

No. 

Economic-Defence Zones 

20  5th  Military  Region’s  Coastal  
Area  Economic-Defence  Zone, 
Provinces  of  Quang  Nam,  Quang 
Ngai, Binh Dinh  

Economic-Defence 
Corps 

516th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

21  Ea  Sup  Economic-Defence  Zone, 

Dak Lak Province 

737th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

22  Bu Gia Phuc - Bu Gia Map Economic-
Defence Zone, Binh Phuoc Province 

778th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

23  North  Lam  Dong  Economic-
Defence Zone, Lam Dong Province 

Lam Dong  
Economic-Defence Corps 

24  Tan Hong Economic-Defence Zone, 

Dong Thap Province 

959th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

25  Long  Xuyen  Rectangle  Economic-
Defence Zone, Kien Giang Province 

915th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

26  15th Army Corps Economic-Defence 

15th Corps 

Zone (15th Corporation) 

27  South Quang Binh Economic-Defence 

Zone, Quang Binh Province 

79th  Economic-Defence 
Corps 

28  16th Army Corps Economic-Defence 

16th Corps 

Zone (16th Corporation) 

128 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Appendix 6 

MULTILATERAL DEFENCE DIPLOMACY 
ACTIVITIES 

1. ASEAN Defence Track (ADMM/ADMM-Plus) 

No. 

Activity 

Participation Level 

I. ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) 

1  ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting 

Ministerial  

(ADMM) and ASEAN Defence 
Ministers’ Meeting Retreat 

2  ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ 

Senior Official 

Meeting (ADSOM) 

3  ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ 

Institute for Defence 

Meeting Working Group (ADSOM WG) 

International 
Relations 

4  ASEAN Defence Industry Collaboration  General Department 

of Defence Industry 

5  Peacekeeping Centers Network 

Viet Nam’s 

Peacekeeping 
Department 

6  ASEAN Defence Establishments and 

Civil Society Organisations on Non-
Traditional Security  

Institute for Defence 
Strategy 

APPENDIX   

129 

No. 

Activity 

Participation Level 

7  Track II Network of ASEAN Defence 

Institute for Defence 

and Security Institutions (NADI)   

Strategy 

8  ASEAN Logistics Support Framework  General Department 

of Logistics  

9  ASEAN Direct Communications 

Signal 

Infrastructure 

10  ASEAN Defence Interaction  

Foreign Relations 

Programme (ADIP) 

11  ASEAN Militaries Ready Group on 

HADR 

Department, MND of 
Viet Nam 

Department of Search 
and Rescue, the 

General Staff 

12  ASEAN Center of Military Medicine  Department of 

Military Medicine, 
General Department 

of Logistics 

II. ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting Plus (ADMM-Plus) 

1  ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-

Ministerial 

Plus (ADMM-Plus) 

2  ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ 

Senior Official 

Meeting-Plus (ADSOM+) 

3  ASEAN Defence Senior Officials’ 
Meeting Working Group Plus 
(ADSOM WG) 

Institute for Defence 
International 
Relations 

130 

No. 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

Activity 

Participation Level 

4  ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group 

Department of Search 

on Humanitarian Assistance and 
Disaster Relief 

and Rescue, the 
General Staff 

5  ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group 

on Military Medicine  

Department of 
Military Medicine, 

General Department 
of Logistics 

6  ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group 

Navy 

on Maritime Security 

7  ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group 

Commando 

on Counter-Terrorism 

8  ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group 

Viet Nam’s 

on Peacekeeping 

Peacekeeping 
Department 

9  ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Group 

Engineering 

on Humanitarian Mine Action  

10  ASEAN-Japan Deputy Defence 

Senior Official 

Ministers’ Meeting  

11  Unofficial ASEAN Defence Ministers’ 
Meeting Plus (United States, China, 
Japan and so on) 

Ministerial 

 
APPENDIX   

131 

2. ASEAN Military Cooperation Track 

No. 

Activity 

Participation Level 

1  ASEAN Chiefs of Defence Forces’ 
Informal Meeting (ACDFIM) 

Chief of General Staff  

2  ASEAN Chief of Armies 

Multilateral Meeting (ACAMM) 

Deputy Chief of General 
Staff  

3  ASEAN Military Intelligence Informal 

Meeting (AMIIM) 

Commander General, 
General Department of 
Defence Intelligence 

4  ASEAN Navy Chiefs’ Meeting 

Navy Commander 

(ANCM) 

5  ASEAN Air Chiefs 

Conference (AACC) 

Air Defence-Air Force 
Commander 

6  ASEAN Military Operations 
Informal Meeting (AMOIM) 

Director of Operations 
Department 

7  ASEAN Chiefs of Military Medicine 

Conference (ACMMC) 

Director of Department 
of Military Medicine 

8  ASEAN Armies Rifle Meet (AARM)  Department of Military 

9  ASEAN Officers’ Meeting 

Training 

1st Army Officer 
College 

 
 
132 

      2019 VIET NAM NATIONAL DEFENCE      

3. Defence Cooperation Under the ARF Framework 

No. 

Activity 

Participation  
level/Agency 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Inter-Sessional Group Meeting on 
Confidence Building Measures and 
Preventive Diplomacy (ISG-CBM&PD) 

Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 

Inter-Sessional Meeting on Disaster 
Relief (ISM-DR)  

Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 

Inter-Sessional Meeting on Counter-
Terrorism and Transnational Crime 
(ISM-CTTC) 

Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 

Inter-Sessional Meeting on Maritime 
Security (ISM-MS)  

Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 

Inter-Sessional Meeting on 
Nonproliferation and Disarmament 
(ISM-NPD&D) 

Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs 

6  ARF Defence Officials’ Dialogue (ARF-

DOD) 

Foreign Relations 
Department, MND 
of Viet Nam 

8  ARF Security Policy Conference (ASPC)   Senior Official  

9  ARF Heads of Defense 

Universities/Colleges/Institutions 

National Defence 
Academy 

 
 
APPENDIX   

133 

4. Other Multilateral Forums 

No. 

Activity 

Participation 

level/Agency 

1  Asian Security Summit 

Minister of National 

Defence 

2  Moscow Conference on International 

Senior Official 

Security 

3  Xiangshan Forum 

Senior Official 

4 

Seoul Defense Dialogue 

Senior Official 

5  Munich Security Conference 

Senior Official 

6  Raisina Dialogue 

Senior Official 

 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Foreword 

PART ONE 
STRATEGIC CONTEXT AND NATIONAL  

                                DEFENCE POLICY 
1. STRATEGIC CONTEXT 
1.1. The World and the Region 
1.2. Viet Nam 
2. NATIONAL DEFENCE POLICY 
2.1.  Strategy to Safeguard the Homeland, Viet Nam’s 

National Defence Strategy, Viet Nam’s Military Strategy 

2.2. Viet Nam’s National Defence Policy 
2.3. International Integration and Defence Diplomacy 
2.4. National Defence Struggle 

PART TWO 
BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE  

                       NATIONAL DEFENCE 

1. BUILDING NATIONAL DEFENCE POTENTIAL 
1.1. Building Political Potential 
1.2. Building Economic and Sociocultural Potential 
1.3. Building Scientific-Technological Potential 
1.4. Building Military Potential 
2. BUILDING THE NATIONAL DEFENCE FORCES 
2.1. Building the All-People Force 
2.2. Building the Viet Nam People’s Army, Militia and 

Self-Defence Force 

3. BUILDING THE ALL-PEOPLE NATIONAL DEFENCE 

POSTURE 

3.1. Building a Strong “People’s Hearts and Minds Posture” 

Page 
5 

7 
9 
9 
12 
20 

20 
23 
26 
29 

33 
35 
36 
37 
41 
42 
45 
45 

46 

48 
48 

 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS   

3.2. Combining National Defence and Security with 

Economy and Society and vice versa 

3.3.  Building Comprehensively Strong Military Regions in 

an Integrated National Defence System 

3.4. Building Provinces and Cities into Strong Defence Zones 
3.5. Building the All-People National Defence Posture in 
Association with the People’s Security Posture 

4. LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF 

NATIONAL DEFENCE 

4.1. Leadership of the Communist Party of Viet Nam 

over the National Defence 

4.2. Leadership of the Communist Party of Viet Nam 

over the Viet Nam People’s Army 
4.3. State Management of National Defence 

PART THREE 
THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY AND     
      THE MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE 

1. THE VIET NAM PEOPLE’S ARMY 
1.1. The Vietnamese Military History Tradition 
1.2. History of the Foundation and Development of the 

Viet Nam People’s Army 

1.3. Functions and Missions of the Viet Nam People’s Army  
1.4. Organisation of the Viet Nam People’s Army 
1.5. Guidelines for Building the Viet Nam People’s Army 
2. MILITIA AND SELF-DEFENCE FORCE 
2.1.  History of the Foundation and Development of the 

Militia and Self-Defence Force 

2.2. Functions and Missions of the Militia and Self-

Defence Force 

2.3. Organisation of the Militia and Self-Defence Force 
2.4. Guidelines for Building the Militia and Self-Defence Force 
CONCLUSION 
APPENDIX 

135 

49 

51 
53 

53 

54 

54 

55 
60 

69 
71 
71 

72 
78 
80 
95 
104 

104 

107 
109 
110 
111 
113

 
In charge of publication 
ACTING DIRECTOR - EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
PHAM CHI THANH 

In charge of content 
VICE DIRECTOR - DEPUTY EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Dr. DO QUANG DUNG 

Copy editors:

MSc. CU THI THUY LAN 

HOANG THU QUYNH 

NGUYEN MINH HA 

LE THI HANG 

Book cover designer:

DUONG HONG MAI 

Digital pre-press specialist:

NGUYEN THI HANG 

Proof print technician:

NGUYEN MINH HA 

Proof-reader:

LE THI HANG 

Printing 2.000 copies, sized 16x24cm, by Phu Thinh Printing and Services Limited Company. 
Address: Lot B2-2-5 Nam Thang Long Industrial Zone, Bac Tu Liem, Hanoi. 
Publication Registration: 4190-2019/CXBIPH/12-270/CTQG. 
Publication Decision: 4340-QĐ/NXBCTQG, 18/10/2019. 
ISBN (Original version): 978-604-57-5163-3. 
ISBN Index: 978-604-57-5164-0. 
Completed and registered in October 2019. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
