ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE

Solving problems, 
growing the economy 
and improving our 
quality of life 

CITATION
Hajkowicz SA1+, Karimi S1, Wark T1, Chen C1, Evans M1,  
Rens N3, Dawson D1, Charlton A2, Brennan T2, Moffatt C2, 
Srikumar S2, Tong KJ2 (2019) Artificial intelligence: Solving 
problems, growing the economy and improving our quality 
of life. CSIRO Data61, Australia. 

COPYRIGHT
© Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation 2019. To the extent permitted by law, all 
rights are reserved and no part of this publication covered 
by copyright may be reproduced or copied in any form or 
by any means except with the written permission of CSIRO.

IMPORTANT DISCLAIMER
CSIRO advises that the information contained in this 
publication comprises general statements based on 
scientific research. The reader is advised and needs to be 
aware that such information may be incomplete or unable 
to be used in any specific situation. No reliance or actions 
must therefore be made on that information without 
seeking prior expert professional, scientific and technical 
advice. To the extent permitted by law, CSIRO (including 
its employees and consultants) excludes all liability to any 
person for any consequences, including but not limited 
to all losses, damages, costs, expenses and any other 
compensation, arising directly or indirectly from using this 
publication (in part or in whole) and any information or 
material contained in it.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was funded by the Australian Government.  
The authors would like to express gratitude to the experts 
from industry, government and community organisations 
who formed the steering committee that guided the 
research. The authors would like to thank our peer 
reviewers who provided detailed, thoughtful and helpful 
input on early drafts including Dr Lauren Palmer (Australian 
Council of Learned Academies), Professor Michael Milford 
(Queensland University of Technology), Professor Peter 
Corke (Queensland University of Technology), Professor 
Toby Walsh (Data61 and University of New South Wales), 
Dr Andrew Reeson (Data61), Dr Olivier Salvado (Data61), 
Dr Elliot Duff (Data61) and Professor Sue Keay (Data61). 
The authors are grateful to the many researchers from 
CSIRO, Data61 and Australian Universities who shared their 
expertise. The authors are grateful to the many Australian 
Government staff who provided detailed comments 
and guidance. The authors would also like to thank the 
hundreds of individuals who attended the consultative 
workshops in Sydney, Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth and 
those people who attended the Data61+ LIVE Conference 
in Brisbane and Sydney. By sharing your knowledge and 
perspective on artificial intelligence you have helped make 
this report possible. 

ACCESSIBILITY
CSIRO is committed to providing web accessible 
content wherever possible. If you are having difficulties 
with accessing this document please contact 
csiroenquiries@csiro.au. 

NOTES
All monetary values are given in Australian dollars unless 
otherwise specified.

1  CSIRO Data61

2  AlphaBeta Advisors—Strategy and Economics

3  Queensland Government, Office of the Queensland  

 Chief Entrepreneur

+  Corresponding author: Stefan Hajkowicz, Senior Principal  
    Scientist Strategic Foresight, CSIRO Data61

 
CONTENTS

Foreword ............................................................................................................................ 1

Executive Summary ...........................................................................................................2

1 

Introduction ..................................................................................................................7

2  How might AI touch the lives of Australians?  ............................................................ 9

3  What is AI? .................................................................................................................. 15

4  The Economic Value of AI ........................................................................................... 19

5  What’s the world doing? ............................................................................................23

6  What’s Australia doing? ..............................................................................................24

7  AI Development Strategies .........................................................................................27

7.1 

Technological Specialisation  ............................................................................................................................... 27

7.2  Mission Directed Research  ..................................................................................................................................29

7.3 

7.4 

Business and Knowledge Ecosystems  .................................................................................................................30

A Story of Transition – From Selling Steel to Selling Steel Know-How ...............................................................31

8  Possible AI Specialisations for Australia ....................................................................33

8.1 

AI for Better Health, Aged Care and Disability Services .....................................................................................34

8.2  AI for Better Towns, Cities and Infrastructure .....................................................................................................36

8.3  AI for Better Natural Resource Management ..................................................................................................... 40

9  Foundations for the Future .........................................................................................47

9.1 

Developing an AI Specialist Workforce ............................................................................................................... 47

9.2 

Career Transitions and Skills Upgrades ...............................................................................................................48

9.3  Data Governance and Access ................................................................................................................................49

9.4 

9.5 

Building Trust in AI ................................................................................................................................................50

Science, Research and Technology Development ...............................................................................................50

9.6  Digital Infrastructure and Cybersecurity ..............................................................................................................51

9.7 

Standards, Interoperability and Ethics ..................................................................................................................51

10  Conclusion ...................................................................................................................53

11  References ...................................................................................................................54

ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 
QUICK FACTS

1

3

Digital technologies, including AI, are potentially worth 
AU$315 billion to the Australian economy by 2028 [18] 
and AI could be worth AU$22.17 trillion to the global 
economy by 2030 [11]. 

The Australian information, communications and 
technology (ICT) sector employs 663,100 workers in 
fields related to AI. This will grow to 758,700 workers 
by 2023 at a rate of 20,000 additional workers per year 
[3]. Today 66,000 ICT workers live in remote and 
regional areas [38]. 

2

4

Australian industry needs up to 161,000 new specialist 
AI workers by 2030 in machine learning, computer 
vision, natural language processing and other 
AI technologies.

An AI system for detecting skin cancer (which could 
become a smartphone app) performed “on par” 
with 21 certified dermatologists [17]. In Australia 
13,280 new cases of melanoma were diagnosed in 
2016 and 1,770 people died from the disease [16]. 
Earlier diagnosis enabled by AI will save lives. 

iv 

Artificial Intelligence

5

8

An on-farm agricultural robot Agbot II developed 
by the Queensland University of Technology could 
save Australia’s farm sector AU$1.3 billion per year by 
automating weed removal and improving agricultural 
productivity [14].

In 2018 there were 1,465 start-ups in Australia, 21% 
of which consider AI relevant to their products or 
services [47]. This increased 6% from 2017 [48]. 
Through this study we surveyed 72 AI start-up 
companies of which 84% report to be adapting 
or developing novel algorithms rather than simply 
using AI toolboxes.

6

9

AI could help reduce the 1,137 deaths/year [81] 
and 57,000 injuries/year [82] on Australian roads. 
Autonomous emergency braking combined with 
forward warning collision systems decreased front-to-
rear injury accidents on US highways by 56% [87].  
When combined with lane departure correction  
these semi-automated technologies could prevent or 
reduce the severity of 1.3 million car crashes on US 
roads each year [86].

AI is being used to help maintain Sydney Harbour 
Bridge. Data61 placed 2400 sensors on the bridge 
which monitor 800 steel and concrete supports 
under the roadway. Data generated by these sensors 
is analysed using machine-learning and predictive 
analytics to identify priority locations for proactive 
maintenance. This keeps costs down and minimises 
traffic disruptions.

7

10

Mining operations in the Pilbara region of Western 
Australia are amongst the world’s most automated. 
Fortescue operates 112 driverless trucks with a 
30% productivity gain. BHP has 50 autonomous 
trucks at its Jimblebar site and 20 autonomous 
drills state-wide [131]. Launched in 2008 Rio Tinto’s 
mine-of-the-future [132] has 140 automated trucks, 
over 11 automated drills, and 60% of train kilometres 
are in autonomous mode.

Drones are already being used to perform rescues and 
spot sharks in the Australian surf. On 18 January 2018 
two teenage boys in the surf 700m from land (in a 3m 
swell) near Lennox Head, NSW were rescued by an 
airborne drone which dropped an inflatable floatation 
device to them. Rescue drones can be equipped with 
AI systems which can automatically detect and help 
people in need. Machine learning and computer vision 
systems are being developed that will automatically 
identify rip currents so beachgoers can be warned.

v

FOREWORD

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is one of those technologies, like advances in 
gene editing or quantum computing, which has the power to change 
life itself. It has the potential to transform economies, unlock new 
societal and environmental value and accelerate scientific discovery. 
With AI estimated to generate $13 trillion in economic activity globally 
by 2030, the global race to lead in AI is well and truly underway.

In April 2019, Australia’s national science agency CSIRO and 
the Department of Industry Innovation and Science (DIIS) 
co-developed a discussion paper for an AI ethics framework to 
respond to issues associated with AI, ensuring we use ethical 
and inclusive values to manage the deep influence it will have 
on the way we live, work and play.

In conjunction with the discussion paper, we have worked with 
DIIS to develop this report which lays the path for how AI can 
boost the productivity of Australian industry, creating jobs and 
economic growth and improving the quality of life for current 
and future generations.

This report leverages CSIRO’s expertise, working in deep 
collaboration with our network of digital specialists, and 
incorporating feedback gathered through national consultation 
with government, academic and industry stakeholders.

If Australia can focus its AI activities on areas of great need that 
matter to all Australians, like drought and food production, 
areas where we already have world-leading expertise, then we 
can achieve the greatest impact. Through this roadmap, we 
highlight opportunities for AI to solve big problems that build 
off our strengths, with a view to exporting solutions to the 
world in three areas: healthy ageing; cities and infrastructure; 
and natural resources and environment.

AI is already a well-established technology, with applications 
across many industries starting to take shape. However, the 
success of our industries of the future will be determined by 
whether AI is simply used to cut costs, or whether we take 
full advantage of this powerful technology to grow new 
opportunities and create new value. We believe this value is 
created when AI is partnered with humans who have deep 
domain expertise in Australia’s key industries. This allows 
us to channel the power of this technology to multiply our 
human ability.

We have already taken the first steps towards determining our 
future with AI, but more people, more industries, and more 
communities must join the conversation.

This report, Artificial Intelligence: Solving problems, growing 
the economy and improving our quality of life, provides the 
guidance and possible pathways forward to ensure our nation 
captures the full potential of AI in our uniquely Australian 
context, to create a better future for all of us.

Dr Larry Marshall

Chief Executive Officer 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 
(CSIRO)

1

EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY

•  Artificial intelligence (AI) may be defined as a collection 
of interrelated technologies used to solve problems 
autonomously and perform tasks to achieve defined 
objectives, in some cases without explicit guidance from 
a human being. Subfields of AI include machine learning, 
computer vision, human language technologies, robotics, 
knowledge representation and other scientific fields.  
The power of AI comes from a convergence of technologies.

•  AI is a general purpose technology that can be used to 
increase the efficiency, safety and quality of production 
processes in almost every industry. AI is already being used 
to solve challenging problems in health, welfare, safety, 
environment, energy, infrastructure, transport, education 
and other sectors. 

•  Global investment into AI continues to grow. In the past few 
years alone, 14 of the world’s most advanced economies 
have announced over $86 billion in focused AI programs 
and activities. This has mostly been in the form of public 
sector investment but does include some private sector 
funds. These investments are improving the capabilities 
and competitiveness of governments, companies and 
workers in the global community and world economy.

•  Australia has established world-leading capabilities in 
a number of core AI-related fields housed within our 
universities, research organisations and companies. AI 
is also already being widely applied and developed by 
Australian governments, companies and start-ups. There are 
untapped opportunities for Australia to develop, coordinate, 
consolidate and concentrate our deep, but distributed, AI 
capabilities on matters of national significance. We can also 
create new job-generating AI industries.

In the past few years alone, 14 of 
the world’s most advanced economies 
have announced over AU$86 billion 
in focused AI programs and activities.

•  To maximise the future benefits and build the right 

foundations for adoption, adaptation and development 
of AI technologies, government, industry and community 
should consider taking action in the following areas:

–  Develop an AI specialist technical workforce to meet the 
operational needs of industry. We estimate that between 
32,000 – 161,000 AI specialist workers will be needed  
by 2030;

–  Help workers whose jobs are likely to be positively or 

negatively impacted by AI and related digital technologies 
make early and strategic career transitions;

2 

Artificial Intelligence

–  Ensure effective data governance and access as AI is 

typically data hungry and machine learning algorithms 
need “training data” to be developed and tested;

–  Build trust in AI by ensuring high standards and 

transparency for all applications developed and applied 
in Australia because without trust people are unlikely to 
adopt AI technologies;

–  Increase the activity within the science, research and 

technology development pipeline to ensure advanced AI 
capabilities for government and industry in the future;

–  Improve digital infrastructure (for data transmission, 

storage, analysis and acquisition) and cybersecurity so 
that AI can be safely and effectively used across Australian 
cities and regions; and

–  Develop appropriate systems and standards to ensure safe, 
quality-assured, interoperable and ethical AI is developed 
and applied within Australia. 

•  Governments worldwide are taking strategic steps to 

achieve improved AI capability for their nations. This report 
identifies three high level strategies for achieving a desired 
AI future for Australia:

–  Technological specialisation: This involves choosing and 
developing targeted areas of specialised AI capability to 
gain comparative advantage in the global marketplace.

–  Mission directed research: This involves identifying clear 
goals and targets for research which are associated with 
solutions to major problems of national significance. 

–  Business and knowledge ecosystems: This approach 

to organisational design aims to identify and leverage 
networks of expertise and resources which lie across 
jurisdictional boundaries. 

AI development is already well underway 
across Australian companies, governments 
and community organisations. 

•  We identified three high potential areas of AI specialisation  
(Figure 1) for Australia based on (a) existing capabilities  
and areas where we have comparative advantage;  
(b) opportunities to solve big problems in Australia and;  
(c) opportunities to export our solutions worldwide.  
The proposed areas of specialisation include: 

1.  Health, ageing and disability. This involves the use of 
AI to improve human health (either via prevention or 
treatment), achieve healthy ageing and support people 
living with disability. Solutions relating to this proposed 
AI specialisation are of high value considering rising or 

Solving significant problems at home, exporting the solutions to the world and building-off our strengths.

Artificial Intelligence Specialisations

Natural Resources and Environment
Develops AI for enhanced natural 
resource management to reduce the 
costs and improve the productivity of 
agriculture, mining, fisheries, forestry  
and environmental management.

Health, Ageing and Disability
Develops AI for health, ageing and 
disability support to reduce costs, 
improve wellbeing and make quality 
care accessible for all Australians.

Cities, Towns and Infrastructure
Develops AI for better towns, cities 
and infrastructure to improve the 
safety, efficiency, cost-effectiveness and 
quality of the built environment.

Figure 1. High potential areas of artificial intelligence specialisation for Australia. 

high rates of chronic illness, ageing populations and 
unsustainable growth healthcare expenditure. Disability 
support enabled by AI will benefit the 4.3 million 
Australians who live with disability, as estimated by the 
Australian Bureau Statistics. AI can be transformative for 
disabled people by improving their life opportunities 
and helping them get good jobs. Australia already has 
world-leading capabilities in AI for health, ageing and 
disability support. These issues are shared by countries 
worldwide and we can export our solutions into the 
global marketplace. 

2.  Cities, towns and infrastructure. This involves the use 
of AI to decrease the costs and improve effectiveness 
of built infrastructure planning, design, construction, 
operation and maintenance. There are significant 
shortcomings in built infrastructure which is already 
impacting the operation of our towns and cities. 
Automation and sensory systems can improve our 
infrastructure. We have world-leading capabilities within 
this area and we can export the solutions to a rapidly 
urbanising world. 

3.  Natural resources and environment. Australia is already 
a world leader in agricultural robotics and the use of 
advanced data science and machine learning on farms. 
We also lead the way in mine site automation and 
environmental monitoring/management applications of 

AI. We can develop these technologies into industries 
which export to a world hungry for more food, fibre, 
minerals and a cleaner environment. 

•  Whilst specialisation is important, we note that many 
of the beneficial outcomes Australia could achieve 
through the development and adoption of AI will emerge 
serendipitously. These areas of specialisation should not 
limit, and where possible should support, the organic 
development of core AI research and capability within 
diverse segments of Australia’s innovation ecosystem. 

•  AI development is already well underway across Australian 
companies, governments and community organisations. 
Many organisations and individuals are making their own 
AI plans and strategies for the future. In this document 
we have identified a high-level pathway for Australia’s 
AI development starting with experimentation which 
eventually leads to entirely new industries (Figure 2).

•  This document is intended to help guide future investment 
in AI and start a national dialogue on some of the ways 
these technologies might drive new economic and societal 
outcomes for Australia. It has been prepared by CSIRO’s 
Data61 to inform the Australian Government’s consideration 
of potential directions to support greater awareness, 
exploration and uptake of AI across our industries 
and communities.

3

Productivity and  
quality-of-life gains

Powerful AI capabilities are 
unleashed into business 
processes and government 
services with major productivity 
gains being realised which 
boost productivity and improve 
people’s quality of life. Rates of 
economic growth and wealth 
generation are boosted.

New industries, new growth 
and a new workforce

Existing industries are 
transformed with new ways 
of doing business and new 
products and service offerings. 
Australia exports AI technology 
to the world in areas of 
specialised capability. Millions 
of workers get new and better 
jobs in the AI economy.

Skills and  
capability development

An entirely new workforce with 
skills in machine learning, data 
science, robotics and computer 
vision starts to emerge as people 
upskill. Organisations acquire 
the assets and capabilities they 
need to operate in an AI future. 
Advanced AI R&D builds a 
pipeline of future opportunity.

Experimentation and  
strategy development

Companies (large and small)  
and governments (at all levels) 
design and experiment with 
prototype AI systems.  
They learn what works and 
develop strategies to build, adapt 
or buy AI tools to achieve their 
objectives. We work out our 
niche in the global AI landscape.

Figure 2. Australia’s Artificial Intelligence Journey –  
Stages on the road to the 2030

4 

Artificial Intelligence

5

6 

Artificial Intelligence

1 

INTRODUCTION

Artificial intelligence (AI) is a general purpose technology 
with the potential to be applied across almost every industry 
within the Australian and global economy. 

AI has parallels to the invention of electricity in the 19th 
Century. As a general purpose technology, electricity 
transformed Australia and the world economy during the latter 
stages of the industrial revolution. It enabled and reshaped 
every industry whilst building an entirely new industry itself. 
Hundreds of thousands of Australians entered good jobs and 
careers building our electricity network and servicing the 
industries it created. 

No one country will drive or decide how the forthcoming 
AI transformation happens – it will be a global effort. 
Technological innovation is set to continue at pace. The 
question is how we can best position our nation to adapt and 
capitalise on these changes for the benefit of all Australians. 
Many countries have already proactively moved to embrace AI, 
making sizeable commitments to investment in advancing their 
nation’s technological capabilities and readiness to adopt these 
technologies, for the future. Australia is charting its pathway. 

It is already anticipated that AI may offer the key to helping us 
solve some of humanity’s greatest challenges such as climate 
change, antibiotic resistant bacteria, road accidents, cancer 
and food, water and energy insecurity. We are already building 
machines that can learn and can problem-solve without 
explicit guidance from a human operator. This can take us 
into new spaces. AI also represents a potential solution to the 
productivity slump which is constraining economic growth and 
wealth generation in advanced economies, including Australia. 

The AI revolution won’t be identical, but will have parallels,  
to previous industrial revolutions, such as the arrival of 
electricity. AI will continue to collide with other technologies 
and elevate our human knowledge and human capability to 
new levels. This report seeks to explore just what AI might 
mean in Australia’s future and how we can build on our  
current research and industry foundations to best harness  
the benefits of AI and deliver improved quality of life for 
current and future Australians. 

AI will continue to collide with other 
technologies and elevate our human 
knowledge and human capability 
to new levels. 

7

8 

Artificial Intelligence

2  HOW MIGHT AI 
TOUCH THE LIVES 
OF AUSTRALIANS? 

A new unfamiliar technology like AI can sound daunting 
and distant to the needs of everyday Australians. But it’s 
already being used to help us on a regular basis and these 
uses will become more prominent and impactful over the 
coming decade as the technology continues to evolve.  
In this section we explore some of the very real ways 
current AI technologies and those coming in the next 
decade are expected to help Australians. 

9

Helping people living with a disability, 
such as impaired vision

Helping senior citizens live independently  
at home longer

Over 575,000 Australians are currently living with vision 
impairment [12], including conditions such as retinitis 
pigmentosa – a genetic disorder associated with gradual loss 
of vision and, although uncommon, complete blindness. AI is 
already driving advances in the diagnosis of such conditions 
and also the development of new technologies to restore 
or improve our sight. An example is the development of the 
bionic eye – an Australian technology which can restore the 
sense of vision to people with retinitis pigmentosa and other 
sight related conditions. The bionic eye comprises a camera 
(attached to glasses), a vision processing unit and an electrode 
array surgically implanted behind the retina. The technology 
converts visual images into electrical signals which lets  
a person experience improved vision – and see things. 

More than 3.8 million Australians are over the age of 80 years 
[13] and many are having to consider the possibility of needing 
to leave the family home and move into a care facility. AI is 
already helping to support ageing Australians to stay in their 
homes longer. Sensory systems using computer vision installed 
in homes can monitor movement and behaviours to detect if 
something is wrong (e.g. a fall or sustained lack of movement) 
and automatically call for assistance. Robotic devices can 
help lift and move heavy objects. Smart devices enabled with 
human language technologies receive and deliver reminders 
about important tasks and events. A medication dispensing 
device can help ensure the right medications are taken,  
at the right times and in the right dosages. Home health 
monitoring equipment can save ageing Australians from 
having to make trips to the doctor or hospital for check-ups. 
And lastly, whilst it can’t ever replace a human, a companion 
robot can provide comfort and company to loved ones with 
conversational capability. 

10 

Artificial Intelligence

Helping farmers keep their properties 
weed free

Weeds reduce crop, pasture and livestock productivity on 
Australian farms. Over the years some weeds have become 
resistant to herbicides and farmers must sometimes resort to 
ripping them from the earth. AI can help. As an example, the 
agricultural robot called Agbot II developed by the Queensland 
University of Technology is about half the size of a tractor and 
can drive across paddocks performing farming operations 
autonomously. Agbot II can save Australia’s farm sector  
$1.3 billion per year by automating weed removal and 
improving agricultural productivity [14]. Technologies such 
as AgBot II are using computer vision and machine learning 
to identify and classify weeds and then determine the 
optimum weed removal method. Robotics can then be used 
to spray weeds (with the right type and amount of herbicide), 
mechanically destroy weeds (rip them out of the ground) or 
use micro-wave destruction methods. Weeds don’t stand a 
chance. This will boost crop and pasture productivity, and 
save farmers time and money. Farm robots can perform 
a wide range of seeding, spraying, tillage, harvesting 
and monitoring operations. 

Helping small business owners trying to 
juggle the day to day demands of running 
their enterprise

AI is already helping business owners better understand their 
customers, supply chains and emerging opportunities for 
growth. There are already numerous Australian companies 
(large and small) using predictive analytics and machine 
learning to analyse their sales data – potentially combined with 
other data (e.g. census data) – to quickly inform how much 
of what products to order and when (days, weeks, months) 
based on seasonal demand. These tools can also help identify 
in-demand products for customers or ways to monitor stock 
inventories and production activity on the factory floor to 
place automatic orders for new products or components when 
they’re running short or demand is forecast to peak. This can 
add up to major cost savings and new opportunities for our 
businesses to compete and thrive. 

11

Helping firefighters fight bushfires

Helping people to improve their mental health

Putting out spot fires (small fires) before they become major 
conflagrations is a mission-critical activity for fire fighting 
teams. But where should firefighters concentrate effort and 
target resources? AI can help. AI is already being used to 
rapidly map forest fire fronts and simulate fire-spread based 
on fuel loads, terrain and climate, to assist firefighters in 
pinpointing their efforts, allowing them to save lives and 
property. For example, the CSIRO Data61 “Spark” system uses 
machine learning to map fire fronts and identify priorities. 
These systems offer the potential to operate in real time, 
providing fire fighters with regular updates and information 
for tactical responses as the situation rapidly unfolds.

According to Beyond Blue over one million Australians are 
currently suffering from depression. Some of these people 
won’t get help and there’s a risk of serious negative life 
outcomes, which sometimes can include suicide risk. AI can 
help. As an example, in October 2017 Lifeline launched the 
#BeALifeline Twitter Direct Message (DM) Chatbot designed to 
help people going through a tough time [15]. It can diagnose 
people at risk and, where appropriate, start a conversation 
to reduce the chances of negative outcomes or suicide. 
Researchers at the University of Melbourne [15] have found that 
young people suffering depression or tough life circumstances 
want more AI enabled chatbots. The chatbot can help someone 
start a tough conversation and then get human expert help. 
As the AI and natural language processing behind the chatbot 
improves it will be able to have much more realistic and helpful 
conversations with people at risk. AI can also reach people in 
remote and regional Australia at any time of day or night on a 
wide range of devices. The chatbot is always there and always 
ready to help. Chatbots can’t replace human counsellors, 
however they can help and will play an increasingly  
important role in reducing depression and suicide risk.  
For many Australians these technologies might make it easier 
to open up about problems and get professional help from  
a human counsellor. 

12 

Artificial Intelligence

Helping people with cancer

Creating career opportunities

In Australia 13,280 new cases of melanoma were diagnosed in 
2016 and 1,770 people died from the disease [16]. If diagnosed 
and treated early the prognosis for treatment of these types 
of conditions is good. But if detected late, the chances of 
survival are much less. AI can help. For example, a machine 
learning technique using deep convolutional neural networks 
was developed by Stanford University scientists to identify skin 
cancers from images [17]. The researchers tested the AI against 
21 certified dermatologists. They found the AI performed 
“on par” with human dermatologists. The researchers indicated 
that the technology could be incorporated in smartphone apps. 
This will allow low-cost and earlier detection of skin cancer 
which will improve survival rates for patients. Many Australians 
who are doctor-shy may be willing to use a convenient 
smartphone app which detects a skin cancer. They could then 
visit a clinician for formal diagnosis and early treatment with 
much better chance of survival. Many other types of cancer 
can be diagnosed and treated early with AI leading to better 
survival rates. 

As AI reshapes the economy it will create new industries and 
new jobs. A study by Data61 and consulting firm AlphaBeta 
found that digital innovation could add an extra $315 billion 
in gross economic value to Australia over the period 2020 – 
2030 [18]. The new industries in areas such as robotics, vehicle 
automation and cybersecurity will drive the demand for skilled 
workers. It’s already happening. The Australian information, 
communications and technology (ICT) sector workforce 
contained around 663,100 workers in 2017 representing a 3.5% 
increase from the previous year [3]. This is forecast to grow to 
758,700 workers by the year 2023 which represents roughly 
20,000 additional workers per year over the coming five year 
period. One of the most rapid-growth professions includes 
“software and applications programmers” which will see 
around 80,000 new job opening in the next five years [3].  
And the salaries are good. For example, the Australian 
Government Job Outlook Website indicates that software and 
applications programmers are likely to experience very strong 
future growth and lower unemployment compared to the 
overall labour market with an annual before-tax salary  
of $104,156 compared to the average worker of $73,112.  
These jobs will also be available to a greater number of 
Australians, with many of these types of jobs moving from 
being only present in Australia’s big cities to numerous 
regional centres. With the right mix of technical and  
human/business skills, Australians will be well placed for  
a great career in a great location.

13

14 

Artificial Intelligence

3  WHAT IS AI?

AI is a powerful, useful and transformative general purpose technology. 
In recent times the discussion about AI has shifted gears – it’s less 
about whether or not computers can think for themselves as explored 
by pioneers such as the famous British Mathematician Alan Turing 
in the 1950s. It’s more about the practical application of powerful 
technologies to perform useful functions and the transformative 
impacts this could have on entire economies and societies. 
In this report we define AI as:

A collection of interrelated technologies used to solve 
problems autonomously and perform tasks to achieve 
defined objectives without explicit guidance from 
a human being.

15

•  Automated planning. Automated planning is a field of 
AI investigating computational models and principles 
to enable an artificial agent to act deliberately [24]. For 
example, when a robot should decide how to perform  
a specific task, such as moving an object, it should first plan 
the required actions. A planner identifies an ordered set of 
required actions to complete a task in a given environment. 
Automated planning has been applied in planning space 
missions by NASA, manufacturing (e.g. Amada Corporation), 
dialogue systems, smart homes, electricity consumption 
modelling, underwater vehicles and computer games [24-27]. 

•  Expert systems. Expert systems were introduced in 1965 

with the aim of approximating human expertise in decision 
making, allowing automation of human knowledge [28]. 
These systems often include two parts: (a) an inference 
engine and; (b) a knowledge base which includes facts 
and rules. Finance and healthcare are two of the main 
applications of such systems, with expert systems for 
disease diagnosis being developed since the 1970s.

•  Knowledge representation. Underlying any intelligent 

system is its source of knowledge. Such knowledge of the 
world requires representation. Representation of domain 
knowledge is challenging because knowledge in the form 
of human expertise is large, dynamic and non-uniform. 
Knowledge representation is currently an active area 
of research within machine learning, natural language 
processing and computer vision communities, especially  
for deep neural networks [29]. 

Researchers have been working in AI domains for decades, 
so why is it gaining so much attention now? The answer 
is partly due to the convergence of multiple technologies. 
Technological innovation isn’t a straight line. It’s not like 
a skyscraper with one floor of scientific achievement built 
vertically on top of another. Innovation is better represented 
as an inverted pyramid where one idea leads to several more 
which support yet more ideas. In his recent book “How Google 
Works”, Google Chairman Eric Schimdt argues humanity is 
entering an era of “combinatorial innovation”, where the pace 
of change is accelerating [30]. That’s why now is different. 
Multiple technologies are converging to create a fundamentally 
new capability that will open new doors.

Machine learning lies at the core of AI and when combined 
with other technologies—such as computer vision, natural 
language processing and robotics—represents a potential step-
change in what’s possible for humanity and our quality of life. 

There are many fields of science and technology (Figure 3) 
which are considered as core to AI such as:

•  Machine learning. Machine learning is a field of study 

that gives the computers the ability to learn without being 
explicitly programmed. There are three main techniques for 
machine learning: statistical machine learning aims to find 
some type of predictive function from the training data; 
reinforcement learning approaches provide AI algorithms 
with “rewards” or “penalties” based on their problem 
solving performance; and deep learning approaches make 
use of artificial neural networks. 

•  Human language technologies. A growing number of 
AI applications depend on the ability of robotics and 
computerised systems to record, interpret and use human 
language. Human language is communicated either 
verbally or via text (handwritten or typed). These two major 
channels of communication are primarily studied by AI 
researchers under the fields of natural language processing; 
sometimes referred to as text analytics and voice and 
speech recognition. The use of these technologies is likely 
to grow considerably over the coming decade. For example, 
It is estimated by 2020 half of all internet searches will be 
conducted via voice [19, 20].

•  Computer vision. This involves analysing digital images 

using image processing algorithms [21]. These algorithms 
often perform image retrieval, image recognition and 
visualisation. Recently, deep learning has revolutionised 
this area, improving the performance of some tasks to 
the level of human vision. A 2014 breakthrough [22] in the 
development of an unsupervised machine learning method, 
called Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) which involves the 
generation of images that look authentic to humans, was a 
major breakthrough for this line of research.

•  Robotics. One of the most interdisciplinary areas of artificial 

intelligence is robotics. It brings together engineering, 
computer vision, machine learning, electronics and various 
other disciplines to create robots which can interact with 
their environment through channels such as sensors, 
speech, vision or text, to complete tasks. This subfield of AI 
is often intertwined with other AI subfields of automated 
planning and plan recognition; as planning is often needed 
by a robot to guide its movement and choices [23].

16 

Artificial Intelligence

K

N

O

W

A

RTIFICIAL INTELLIGEN
LEDGE REPRESENTATIO

N

CE

Voice and 
speech 
recognition

H

M

U
TEC

A

H

N LA
OLO

N

N

GU
GIES

A
GE 

Natural 
Language 
Processing

Search and 
information 
retrieval

Expert 
Systems

M

A

C

HINE LEA

R

NIN
G

Computer 
Vision

Reinforcement 
learning

Affective 
Computing

Statistical methods

Deep learning

Robotics

Automated 
planning 
and plan 
recognition

Figure 3. Science domains of artificial intelligence.

17

18 

Artificial Intelligence

4  THE ECONOMIC 
VALUE OF AI

Productivity is the level of efficiency via which the economy converts 
its inputs to outputs. Productivity improvements are vital for long term 
economic growth and wealth generation. AI represents a significant new 
opportunity to boost productivity and enhance our national economy. 
This is because AI creates the potential for industry to make better 
products, and deliver better services, faster, cheaper and safer. 

19

Like many of the world’s advanced economies Australia faces 
medium-term growth challenges associated with population 
ageing and low multi-factor productivity growth. The average 
annual productivity growth rate in Australia over the last 
10 years has been roughly half the long-term 30 year average. 
According to economic studies by the Australian Government, 
productivity growth must increase in order to maintain our 
trajectory of continued improvements in living standards  
[31, 32]. Furthermore, overall economic growth measured 
via gross domestic product (GDP) is also below historic 
performance (Figure 4). In the 1960s Australia’s average annual 
GDP growth rate was 5.6%. In the 2010s it averaged 2.6% [33].  
This phenomena, impacting all of the world’s advanced 
economies, was referred to by José Ángel Gurría – the 
Secretary General of the OECD – as the “low growth trap” [34]. 

As a general purpose technology AI 
could be the missing ingredient in the 
productivity equation which turns things 
around and returns the worlds advanced 
economies to stronger growth. 

As a general purpose technology AI could be the missing 
ingredient in the productivity equation which turns things 
around and returns the world’s advanced economies to 
stronger growth. This is a perspective put forward in a recent 
working paper by economists published by Stanford University 
[35], and a separate report by economists at consulting firm 
Accenture [36]. These researchers argue AI is adding something 
new to an economy’s productivity engine and rewriting the 
economic growth equation. 

The potential of AI to improve productivity is supported by 
several economic studies which estimate the productivity 
gains associated with AI and digital technology application. 
For example, consulting firm McKinsey [37] estimates digital 
technologies could contribute $140 to $250 billion to 
Australia’s GDP by 2025 and that automation technologies  
(a subset of AI technology) would comprise $30 to $60 billion 
for Australia over the same time period. Another recent study 
by consulting firm AlphaBeta and CSIRO’s Data61 [18] estimates 
that digital technologies, including AI, are potentially worth 
$315 billion to the Australian economy by 2028. 

The average annual productivity growth 
rate in Australia over the last 10 years  
has been roughly half the long-term  
30 year average.

)

%

(
e
t
a
R
h
t

w
o
r
G

l
a
u
n
n
A

5.4 5.6

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

3.7

3.4

3.4

2.9

3.2

2.6

3.1

1.8

2.6

2.1

?

?

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

2010s

2020s  
(AI Enabled)

OECD

Australia

Figure 4. Average annual economic growth rates by decade. 

Source: OECD Statistics [25] 

20 

Artificial Intelligence

 
 
 
Another trend of relevance is the increasing importance 
of the information technology sector to Australia’s economy 
(Figure 5). This sector is both using and developing powerful 
AI technology. In the past few years it has broken away from 
the rest of the share market and is already boosting growth 
in the Australian economy. Examples include companies 
such as Technology One, WiseTech, REA Group (including 
realestate.com), carsales.com, Afterpay, Xero, all of which 
are investing heavily in advanced digital and AI capabilities. 
According to the S&P ASX200 Information Technology 
Index, over the entire month ending July 2019 the market 
capitalisation of ASX200 technology sector companies 
ranged from $1.2 billion to $10.2 billion with a mean value 
of $4.9 billion which is indicative of price volatility within this 
sector. The breakaway of the information technology sector 
can be seen over a longer time period in the United States by 
comparing the NASDAQ with the Dow Jones Industrial Average. 
The NASDAQ has shown more rapid growth over the decades 
compared to the Dow Jones. 

A recent report by consulting firm AlphaBeta [38] argues 
the information technology sector currently contributes 
$122 billion to the Australian economy employing 
580,000 workers. The report suggests that we can boost 
Australia’s GDP by $207 billion/year if the Australian technology 
sector grows on par with global leaders. The report also finds 
that 66,000 workers in the information technology sector live 
in remote and regional Australia and that 90% of information 
technology sector businesses are small to medium enterprises.

Digital technologies, including AI,  
are potentially worth AU$315 billion  
to the Australian economy by 2028.

t
a
d
e
s
a
b
(

s
e
c
i

d
n

I

P
&
S

9
0
0
2

y
l
u
J
n

 i

0
0
1

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

9
0
0
2

l

u
J

0
1
0
2
n
a
J

0
1
0
2

l

u
J

1
1
0
2
n
a
J

1
1
0
2

l

u
J

2
1
0
2
n
a
J

2
1
0
2

l

u
J

3
1
0
2
n
a
J

3
1
0
2

l

u
J

4
1
0
2
n
a
J

4
1
0
2

l

u
J

5
1
0
2
n
a
J

5
1
0
2

l

u
J

6
1
0
2
n
a
J

6
1
0
2

l

u
J

7
1
0
2
n
a
J

7
1
0
2

l

u
J

8
1
0
2
n
a
J

8
1
0
2

l

u
J

9
1
0
2
n
a
J

9
1
0
2

l

u
J

S&P/ASX 200 Information Technology Sector

S&P/ASX 200

Figure 5. The information technology sector compared to the broader market. 

Data source: The Australian Stock Exchange and S&P Dow Jones Indices. 

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 

Artificial Intelligence

5  WHAT’S THE  
WORLD DOING?

Recent times have seen an unprecedented level of global 
activity and investment in AI. In the past few years, 14 of 
the world’s advanced economies have announced a total of 
$86 billion in AI programs and activity. This is mostly public 
sector investment but does include some private sector funds. 
Additional non-publicised investment is likely.

There is a widespread view among these economies that 
AI will boost industry and worker productivity and achieve 
competitive advantage in global markets. The investments 
are being used to fund AI research and development, boost 
training and education, encourage industry adoption, seed 
start-ups and promote ethical application. 

There are opportunities for Australia to leverage offshore 
investments in AI technologies. There are also opportunities for 
Australia to fill niches in the global marketplace, creating new 
opportunities for our own economy and developing AI exporting 
industries which build-off our strengths in science and technology. 

On 22 May 2019, all member countries of the Organisation 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Council on 
Artificial Intelligence (including Australia) approved a set of 
recommendations on AI [39]. Although not legally binding these 
recommendations are likely to be influential for AI at the global 
scale. The recommendations contain principles for the beneficial, 
safe and ethical application of AI. The recommendations 
also suggest actions for governments seeking to develop AI 
capability. These actions relate to research and development, 
digital infrastructure, business ecosystems, policy designs, skills 
development and cross-jurisdictional cooperation.

In preparing this document we reviewed AI developments 
worldwide over the past few years:

•  The United States has deep, longstanding and world-leading 

capability in many scientific fields of AI and many areas 
of application. United States technology corporations 
such as Alphabet (Google), Microsoft, Amazon, Apple and 
other NASDAQ-listed companies are actively developing 
powerful AI systems which are becoming industry-standard 
across many sectors. These companies have large research 
and development budgets. The US Government and 
philanthropic-sector are investing heavily in applied and 
pure-discovery aspects of AI research. Many of the most 
influential scientific research papers on machine learning 
have been published by researchers at United States 
universities and technology companies. 

•  In recent years China has come to the fore with rapid 

development of advanced AI capability in diverse fields. Today 
China has broad and deep AI capabilities with widespread 
deployment of robotics and autonomous systems across all 
industry sectors. There has been an explosion of academic 
publishing in the field of AI from China’s university and research 
sector. There is a mix of public and private sector AI activity 
in China with vast investments in pure and applied research. 

Companies such as Alibaba Baidu and Tencent are pouring 
substantial resources in to specialist AI capability development.
•  The European Commission has invested heavily in AI capability 

rivalling the activity in China and the United States. The 
“Artificial Intelligence for Europe” strategy involves investment 
in AI research capabilities relating to robotics, quantum 
computing and other fields. The strategy also supports 
research centres across Europe with the aim of developing 
numerous AI centres of excellence. The European AI strategy 
pays considerable attention to ethics and data governance; 
seeing ethical AI as a point of competitive differentiation. 
•  The German AI Strategy was launched in December 2018 and 
is primarily aimed at boosting the vast and well-established 
German manufacturing sector. The German AI strategy 
seeks to achieve high levels of quality-assurance so that 
German-made AI is recognised by customers as high-quality; 
as achieved by brands such as Miele and BMW. The German 
Government is also sponsoring many university research 
teams to conduct pure-discovery oriented AI research to 
generate novel approaches for AI problem solving and next-
generation technological capability. 

•  Canada was the first country to launch an official AI Strategy 

called the “Pan-Canadian Artificial Intelligence Strategy” in 2017. 
This strategy grew the number of outstanding AI researchers and 
skilled graduates across the nation, established interconnected 
nodes of scientific excellence in Canada’s three major centres 
for AI (Edmonton, Montreal and Toronto), supported a 
national research community on AI and to developed global 
thought leadership on the economic, ethical, policy and legal 
implications of advances in AI. Since launching this strategy 
Canada has continued to increase its AI activity and investment. 
•  The United Kingdom AI strategy “AI in the UK: Ready, willing 

and able?” was published in 2018 and aims to grow the 
population of doctoral researchers and the overall skills 
and capabilities of the UK workforce in all aspects of AI. 
The strategy also has a strong focus on ethical AI as a key 
differentiator in global markets. The area around Cambridge 
has emerged as a mini Silicon Valley with an explosion of 
high-tech digital firms. The UK is also home to the Google 
company Deepmind which has headquarters in London. 
Deepmind is credited with some of the most significant 
breakthroughs in the field of Machine Learning. 

•  The French AI Strategy was released in 2018 and is heavily 
focused on the social, ethical and economic aspects of the 
technology. The French strategy aims to upgrade the skills 
of industry to build, adapt and apply AI within production 
processes. It also aims to upskill an entirely new workforce of 
AI workers and researchers. The French strategy also involves 
reviewing and improving legislation, regulation and policies 
to accommodate AI within all aspects of French society. 

•  In addition to these countries Singapore, Taiwan, Japan, India, 
United Arab Emirates, South Korea, Finland and New Zealand 
have all announced significant AI activity.

23

6  WHAT’S AUSTRALIA  
DOING?

There’s a vast amount of AI activity 
underway and Australia has world-leading 
and longstanding capabilities in many 
core AI research fields. 

In the May 2018 Budget, the Australian Government announced 
$29.9 million to advance AI and machine learning, along with 
development of an AI Technology Roadmap (this document), 
a standards framework and a national ethics framework [40]. 

The funds support AI related Cooperative Research Centre 
Projects (CRC-P), PhD scholarships and school related learning. 
Australia’s national science agency, CSIRO, also announced 
a $19 million initiative on AI and machine learning “to target 
AI-driven solutions for areas including food security and 
quality, health and wellbeing, sustainable energy and 
resources, resilient and valuable environments, and Australian 
and regional security” [41]. States and territories are also 
investing, with prominent examples being South Australia 
investing $7.1 million into an AI and Machine Learning 
Institute at the University of Adelaide [42] and the Queensland 
government’s $3 million investment in an AI Hub at its 
innovation centre “The Precinct” in Brisbane. 

Multiple Australian universities and research organisations 
have longstanding (decadal) robotics and AI related research 
and teaching units. Since 2010 the Australian Research 
Council has awarded $243 million on pure research projects 
classified as “AI and image processing” [43]. The Queensland 
University of Technology is home to the Australian Centre 
for Robotic Vision which works in partnership with CSIRO, 
the Australian National University and Monash University. 
The Australian Centre for Field Robotics at the University of 
Sydney is one of the world’s largest robotics teams which 
specialises in applications of robots in outdoor environments. 
Australia’s mining companies, CSIRO and partner universities 
also have long-established world leading expertise in mine 
site automation. 

Since 2010 the Australian Research 
Council has awarded over AU$243 million 
on pure research projects classified 
as AI and image processing.

$47

$31

$26

$22

$25

$28

$18

$19

$18

$9

s
r
a
l
l

o
D
n
a
i
l
a
r
t
s
u
A
f
o
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

M

i

)
l
a
n
m
o
N

(

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

Figure 6. Australian Research Council pure research funding for artificial intelligence

Data source: Australian Research Council Grants Database [43]. This represents the annual total of projects funded under the research field code 
801 “Artificial Intelligence and Image Processing”. In 2014 a single large $19 million project was funded at the Queensland University related to 
robotic vision [44]. 

24 

Artificial Intelligence

 
 
 
 
 
There are several active and planned innovation precincts 
in Australia with a specific focus on AI, which aim to foster 
industry–research collaboration, commercialisation and 
innovation. The Australian Government, working with state and 
territory governments, universities and research organisations, 
has endorsed a Statement of Principles for Australian 
Innovation Precincts to provide best-practice advice to 
encourage the right settings for precinct development [45, 46].

Existing data on the Australian start-up scene indicates there 
are 1,465 start-ups in total and that 21% of these consider AI 
relevant to their products or services [47]. This has increased 
from 6% in 2017 [48]. We surveyed 72 AI start-up companies 
of which 84% report to be adapting or developing novel 

algorithms rather than simply using AI toolboxes. Some of the 
challenges reported by the AI start-ups included accessing skills 
and talent; securing investment funds; industry risk aversion 
and market access. As the AI sector develops in Australia,  
the SME Export Hubs Initiative may provide support to enable 
greater collaboration and realise AI export opportunities [49]. 

Overall, there is evidence of widespread development and 
application of AI technology in Australian organisations and 
strong AI capability across the nation. Through this project 
we identified 285 applications of AI technology across the 
entire Australian economy by companies (152 applications), 
governments (93 applications) and research organisations  
(40 applications). 

25

26 

Artificial Intelligence

7  AI DEVELOPMENT 
STRATEGIES

Enabling the entire Australian economy with AI represents a complex 
policy and strategy challenge. Here we identify three broad strategic 
approaches for technology development which could be used to 
realise AI objectives for Australia. 

Technological Specialisation 
7.1 
The development of AI capability in Australia is likely to 
benefit from a targeted approach which focuses on areas of 
specialisation. This involves selecting a small number of high 
potential areas of AI-related technological capability and 
targeting resources to accelerate innovation, integration and 
adoption in those chosen areas.

There is much evidence that technological specialisation 
boosts economic growth [50-54] especially in advanced 
economies like Australia’s. For example, a comprehensive 
economic study [51] of all countries comprising the European 
Union over the years 1969 to 1998 by researchers from the 
University of Wuppertal in Germany found that: “the level 
of relative technological specialisation in the area of R&D-
intensive industries and especially in the area of leading-edge 
industries contributes significantly to economic growth” 
(p271). An earlier study of technological specialisation [50] 
amongst 20 OECD countries during 1975-1990 came to a similar 
conclusion stating that “a general positive relationship is found 
between the degree of specialisation in technology and higher 
rates of growth” (p157). 

These empirical studies support longstanding theories in 
economics about economies-of-scale, comparative advantage 
and trade. Specialisation allows a country to decrease the 
costs of production and produce a higher quality product. 
That makes it difficult for other countries to compete. 
However, there are also some risks with specialisation. 
The most significant risk is a failure to specialise in the 
correct area of science and technology due to future changes 
in consumer demand or the emergence of competition 
from other industries worldwide. This can be managed via 
a targeted, adaptive and balanced specialisation strategy 
and the Australian Government could consider leading the 
coordination of such a strategy with industry and researchers. 

We note that whilst planned specialisation can be an  
effective industry growth strategy, serendipity and organic 
growth are also extremely effective development pathways. 
Many science, research and technology breakthroughs which 
have generated the largest social and economic benefit have 
been serendipitous. 

Identifying and developing targeted areas of AI specialisation 
for Australia, along with other initiatives, could be an effective 
approach for building capacity across the entire economy. 

There is much evidence that  
technological specialisation boosts 
economic growth especially in advanced 
economies like Australia’s.

27

CASE STUDY –  
The Pittsburgh steel industry
An example of effective technological specialisation is the United States 
Pittsburgh steel industry. 

At the height of the boom in the 1950s and 1960s, Pittsburgh was one of 
the largest steel producing regions in the US, however a decline in steel 
prices during 1970s and 1980s saw most steel mills in Pittsburgh closed. 

In response, the US Government implemented a steel technology 
specialisation strategy, to transition the economy towards new sources 
of wealth and jobs. By 2010 there were two academic and eight corporate 
steel research centres in Pittsburgh, providing specialised expertise in 
metallurgical and materials science. 

Specialisation in steel production, and then steel technology, allowed 
Pittsburgh to achieve continued economic growth, low unemployment 
and rising salaries. 

CASE STUDY –  
The ‘Cambridge Phenomena’
An example of non-centralised and serendipitous emergence 
of a technology industry is the UK’s “Cambridge Phenomena”. 

Cambridge University is a research and teaching institution which 
has long pursued excellence, but with negligible centralised control. 
Academics and schools within the university are expected to meet 
high standards of competency and achievement, but can largely 
pursue their own directions. The results have been spectacular:

•  Following explosive growth in the 1980s and 1990s, by 

year 2000 there were over 1,200 high tech firms employing 
36,000 people (or 10% of the entire Cambridgeshire workforce) [7].

•  The ecosystem continued to grow over the global financial crisis 
years of 2008-2009 and by the year 2013 had 1,500 firms, five of 
which had valuations over US$1 billion [9]. 

•  The success of the tech start-ups attracted larger companies 

with larger investments. Microsoft, Google and Toshiba are a few 
of the companies setting up major R&D labs in Cambridge [9].

28 

Artificial Intelligence

7.2  Mission Directed Research 
A mission-directed approach to technology development  
aims to identify, and solve, national problems and challenges.  
For example, Australia might want to set a bold target around 
using AI to rapidly boost early diagnosis of cancer. This can have 
the effect of consolidating national capability and generating 
spin-off companies and industries. Concepts of mission-directed 
research have been developed by the Australian Government 
[55] and Mariana Mazzucato from the University of Sussex 
and the University College London [56]. It is possible that 
mission-directed research designs could be used to concentrate 
AI capabilities whilst building industries which export the 
solutions globally. Missions could complement  
the specialisations. 

An example of a mission directed AI program comes from the 
United Kingdom. This year the UK Government Department 
of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy announced a 
missions-based approach to build the nation’s future industries 
[57]. As stated on the department’s website “each mission will 
focus on a specific problem, bringing government, businesses 
and organisations across the country together to make a real 
difference to people’s lives” [57]. The first mission involves 
the use of AI and innovation to improve the prevention, 
diagnosis and treatment of chronic diseases by the year 2030. 
This mission involves quantifiable outcomes. For example, the 
UK government estimates that AI and other innovations could 
result in 50,000 more people having their cancers diagnosed 
early-stage (rather than late-stage) which would mean 
20,000 fewer deaths (within 5 years of diagnosis) compared to 
the situation today [57]. This is a mission to not only improve 
people’s quality of life, but also to grow new industries and 
new jobs. 

A missions-based, or grand-challenges, approach could be an 
effective way of developing Australia’s AI capability whilst also 
solving problems of national significance. 

29

7.3  Business and 
Knowledge Ecosystems 
Ecosystem strategies aim to map and model the entire network 
of institutions, resources and/or individuals relevant to 
business objectives. They look beyond organisational and/or 
jurisdictional boundaries to the flow of ideas and resources. 
Ecosystem designs may be an effective approach for the AI 
enablement of Australian industry given that our AI capability 
is distributed across multiple public and private sector 
institutions, research organisations and diverse geographic 
locations. There is also considerable connectivity with overseas 
research capability.

Ecosystems avoid or reduce the need to create new centralised 
institutes. An ecosystem approach is of growing popularity in 
the fields of organisational design and management strategy 
[58-60]. The concept of a “business ecosystem” was introduced 
by James Moore in the 1993 May-June issue of the Harvard 
Business Review [61]. It was based on a study of a company 
called Apple Computers. Moore wrote that “Apple Computer 
is the leader of an ecosystem that crosses at least four major 
industries: personal computers, consumer electronics, 
information, and communications. The Apple ecosystem 
encompasses an extended web of suppliers that includes 
Motorola and Sony and a large number of customers in various 
market segments”. At the time Apple Computers wasn’t 
worth much. However, by August 2018 Apple was the world’s 
first company to reach market capitalisation of US$1 trillion. 
It was accompanied by unprecedented growth in the 
information technology sector with companies such as Google 
(Alphabet), Microsoft, Facebook, Amazon and others seeing 
unprecedented rates of growth. All adopted similar ecosystem 
models within their organisational structures and cultures. 

Ecosystems of AI activity which span existing public and private 
sector organisations could be an effective way of developing AI 
capability rather than building entirely new institutions. 

30 

Artificial Intelligence

CASE STUDY –  
Commonwealth Bank of Australia
Ecosystems are being increasingly used in organisational 
design within Australian companies. On 28 May 2019 
the Commonwealth Bank of Australia announced a new 
business ecosystem structure for its Institutional Banking 
and Markets function [1]. The new structure is based 
on six ecosystems: connected services; efficient supply 
chains; future cities; future resources; intelligent finance 
and smart networks. 

The bank has used an ecosystems approach because 
it is the most effective way of supplying data-driven 
insights to their customers in a digitally transformed 
global economy. The Commonwealth Bank’s Group 
Executive of Institutional Banking and Markets Andrew 
Hinchliff is quoted in the Australian Financial Review 
(28 May 2019) saying “These [ecosystems] are designed 
to understand the interdependencies of a business 
with the surrounding businesses and environment 
around it” [1]. 

The ecosystem may become a common approach 
to organisational design considering digital 
transformation and data-driven decision making.

As the company adopted new technology, the business 
doubled in size and for every new piece of automated 
equipment installed another 10 people have been employed. 
Des highlights the fact that no jobs were lost through the 
technology transition and some boiler makers are now the 
company’s technology experts.

As 1,500 staff hours were removed from the factory floor 
through the automated equipment, staff undertook 
new roles using their expert knowledge of steel and the 
fabrication process. Investment in staff retention and 
professional development has allowed the company to 
expand its capabilities, continue to learn and opened new 
business opportunities.

Watkins Steel has grown beyond humble South East 
Queensland beginnings to enter global markets. The staff have 
built global networks and participate in international networks 
to tap into the latest developments.

7.4  A Story of Transition – From 
Selling Steel to Selling Steel Know-How
It’s not just the technology giants such as Google and Microsoft 
benefiting from AI enablement. It’s happening across the 
spectrum. Successful technology transitions are underway in 
small and large companies across Australia in very traditional 
sectors. One of the most striking examples comes from 
Brisbane based father-son company Watkins Steel. What’s 
remarkable about this case study is that not a single employee 
was lost in its process of transforming; rather the company 
grew its workforce and created more jobs as it switched from 
steel manufacturing to steel technology.

Based in Brisbane, 50-year old company Watkins Steel 
specialises in small to mid-size structural steel, metal work, 
urban arts scapes, architectural structures and refurbishments. 
Three years ago, recognizing the potential of digital 
technologies, the company started its transformation from 
traditional steel fabrication to technology services offering  
3D laser scanning, design and data collection.

Watkins Steel has developed a unique digital workflow 
that links the entire fabrication and installation process 
from start to finish, connecting digital equipment, software 
and people, for improved steel detailing. The CEO Des 
Watkins characterises the transition between old and new, 
as going from the shop floor to the up-stairs office, where 
traditional hard-hats are replaced with cutting-edge HoloLens 
(augmented reality) technology.

31

32 

Artificial Intelligence

8  POSSIBLE AI 
SPECIALISATIONS 
FOR AUSTRALIA

We have identified three domains of AI development and 
application where Australia is well positioned to transform 
existing industries and build new ones. These specialisations have 
been selected based on (a) existing strengths and capabilities 
where we have comparative advantage; (b) opportunities to solve 
big problems for Australia and; (c) opportunities to export the 
solutions worldwide to other problem holders. We stress that 
this is an early and emerging analysis. We expect these areas 
of specialisation will be refined as more information about the 
breadth and depth of AI capability is identified.

33

8.1  AI for Better Health,  
Aged Care and Disability Services
AI is being widely applied and developed within the healthcare 
sector in Australia and worldwide. In surgical applications 
robotics are being used to improve the precision and efficacy 
of operations. Machine learning, data science and predictive 
analytics are being used to provide earlier and more accurate 
diagnosis of cancer, infectious disease and other forms of 
illness. Sensory systems combined with other technologies are 
being used to monitor and assist older Australians creating 
the possibility of living at home for longer before going into 
a retirement home. There is much that AI systems can do to 
improve our health and wellbeing.

PROBLEMS TO SOLVE 

8.1.1 
Australia faces acute challenges in meeting the health and 
aged care needs of the future. This includes both physical 
and mental health. Total healthcare expenditure in Australia 
reached $181 billion in financial year 2016/17 representing 
more than $7,400 per person and 10% of overall economic 
activity [62]. This is associated with 4.7% annual growth in real 
expenditure [62] which is above the rate of real income growth 
in the economy. A CSIRO report on the future of health states 
ongoing cost pressures will continue and without intervention 
Australian governments will need to double spending on 
healthcare per capita by 2055 to finance current levels of 
service [63].

Already we can see patients and senior citizens struggling 
to get the level of care they require. Median wait times for 
elective surgery increased from 36 days in 2014 to 40 days 
in 2018. The number of people who presented to emergency 
departments and were “seen on time” decreased from 75% 
in 2014 to 72% in 2018 [64]. The median wait time to enter 
residential aged care facilities has increased to 121 days in 2018 
up from 84 days in 2016 [65]. Approximately seven million 
Australians, representing 29% of the population, live in  
regional and remote areas which have unique healthcare 
challenges [66]. Compared to major cities, remote areas have 
5.4x the rate of deaths due to land transportation accidents 
and 1.3x overall mortality rates [67]. 

Australia’s ageing population and demographic pressures 
are also high priority challenges. The number of Australians 
aged 65 and over is predicted to increase from 3.8 million 
to 5.2 million by 2027 [68]. This is associated with increasing 
prevalence of certain types of disease. For example, without  
a medical breakthrough, the number of people with dementia 
is expected to increase to 536,164 by 2025 [68]. In the four year 
period from 2012 to 2016 palliative care provided in hospitals 
rose by 28%. The rate of subsidised palliative care-related 
prescriptions rose at an average annual rate of 17% [69]. Our 
ageing population could increase public health expenditure by 
1-4% of GDP [70] placing further pressure on strained budgets.

The same five health issues continue to cause most deaths of 
Australians (male and female) and have remained relatively 
stable over the preceding decade (2006-2016). Coronary heart 
disease, dementia & Alzheimer’s disease, cerebrovascular 
disease, lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease led to 58,276 of 158,500 deaths in 2016 [71]. Collectively, 
chronic conditions account for 87% of deaths, 61% of total 
disease burden and 37% of hospitalisations [69]. In 2018 an 
estimated 138,300 Australians will be diagnosed with cancer 
and 48,600 will die from cancer [69]. The Australian Institute 
of Health and Wellbeing found that in 2016 there were over 
26,600 potentially avoidable deaths [72]. 

Already AI systems are matching, or even outperforming, 
human experts in areas such as oncology, radiology and 
retinal disease. For example, a machine learning technique 
using deep convolutional neural networks was developed by 
Stanford University scientists to identify skin cancers from 
images [17]. The researchers tested the AI against 21 certified 
dermatologists. They found the AI performed “on par” with 
human dermatologists. The researchers indicated that the 
technology could be incorporated in smartphone apps. 
This will allow low-cost and earlier detection of skin cancer 
which will improve survival rates for patients. Such technology 
would be hugely beneficial in Australia which has amongst the 
highest rates of skin cancer in the world.

Overall the demand for health and aged care services in 
Australia is set to escalate and expenditure will continue to 
rise. Innovation is essential to ensure improved, or even, 
maintained quality of services. AI will be an important 
technology which allows us to deliver better healthcare  
in a cost efficient manner. 

Already AI systems are matching,  
or even outperforming, human experts 
in areas such as oncology, radiology and 
retinal disease.

34 

Artificial Intelligence

CASE STUDY –  
AI for Disability Support Services
According to data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics  
4.3 million Australians live with some type of disability.  
There is considerable scope for AI to help these people live 
better lives as documented in a recent publication in the 
Disability Support Guide [2]. For example, the new Soundscape 
app by Vision Australia and Microsoft allows people who are 
blind (or vision impaired) to receive audio prompts about objects 
in their immediate surroundings. Soundscape uses computer 
vision and headphones to tell the person whether they’re 
looking at a road, café, railway station, bike track or other 
object. This is part of Microsoft’s $25 million 5-year program 
called AI for Accessibility. In another case the Endeavour 
Foundation has launched 15 training programs which use virtual 
reality (VR) to help people with intellectual disabilities learn 
a wide range of skills including road safety, how to use an 
automatic teller machine and how to be a barista. 

CASE STUDY –  
AI for Mental Health
Mental health can also be improved by AI. For example, an 
Australian CSIRO Data61 technology uses AI techniques and simple 
computer games to diagnose mental disorders. The computer 
game presents patients with choices and tracks their behaviour. 
Based on how they respond the AI system can diagnose 
whether they are likely to have a mental disorder and what type. 
The AI system uses a machine learning technique called artificial 
neural networks to record and analyse a vast range of subtle 
behavioural responses in the patient. By analysing this data, the AI 
system can make a reliable diagnosis. It has already been applied to 
accurately diagnose patients with depression and bipolar disorder. 
This represents an improvement on standard questionnaires used 
by clinicians in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) and the 
International Classification of Diseases (ICD).

35

The global digital healthcare 
market is expected to exceed 
AU$521.22 billion by 2024.

8.1.3  OPPORTUNITIES TO EXPORT
A recent report by the World Health Organisation [78] reveals 
the size and growth of global health expenditure. In 2015 the 
world spent $10.6 trillion on healthcare representing 10% of 
global GDP with an annual growth rate of 4% compared to 
the overall economic growth rate of 2.8%. Continued growth 
in expenditure can be expected as the world’s economy and 
human population grows. There are significant technology 
markets within the global healthcare sector. Recent analysis by 
AlphaBeta has identified safe and secure precision healthcare 
as a $140 billion to $190 billion global market by 2028 with 
$30 billion to $50 billion of revenue generated in Asia-Pacific 
alone [70]. The global digital healthcare market is expected to 
exceed $521.22 billion by 2024 [79]. Furthermore, the world will 
experience population ageing. The global share of over-60s is 
expected to increase to 21% by 2050 up from 13% in 2017 [70, 
80]. In summary there is strong evidence for massive growth 
in demand for healthcare and aged care solutions at the global 
scale. Australia is well positioned to develop and supply AI 
products into the global market. 

8.2  AI for Better Towns, 
Cities and Infrastructure
This specialisation captures all the ways that AI can be used 
to improve our built environment capturing social, economic 
and environmental benefits. This includes improved design, 
planning, construction, operation and maintenance of 
infrastructure and buildings. It also includes all the ways 
that AI can be used to improve the efficiency and safety 
of transportation, electricity and water services. 

8.1.2  AUSTRALIAN CAPABILITY 
Australia already has strong capability relating to the 
application of AI and related digital technologies for healthcare 
and aged care. In this section we provide a few examples of 
research teams and companies doing exemplary work. But 
we note a much larger number of research organisations, 
companies and governments applying AI to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of health and aged care services.

An outstanding Australian invention is the bionic eye [73].  
This is a retinal implant placed at the back of the eye. Sensors 
built into glasses capture visual input and feed it into the 
optic nerve and onto the brain. This can restore some level 
of sight to a visually impaired person. The bionic eye has 
been developed by the National Vision Research Institute 
in partnership with the University of Melbourne, Monash 
University and Lions International. The bionic eye represents 
advanced application of computer vision which is a field of AI 
research. There is huge potential to develop, apply and export 
this technology. 

The University of Melbourne will become home to the 
Australian Research Council (ARC) Training Centre in 
Cognitive Computing for Medical Technologies, receiving 
$4.1 million in government funding. The centre aims to breed 
commercially savvy AI researchers with deep expertise in 
medical technologies [74]. At Deakin University the Applied 
Artificial Intelligence Institute (A2I2) in partnership with the 
Alfred Hospital has developed an AI decision support system 
to assist doctors and nurses within the hospital’s trauma 
bay to make better decisions when stabilising a patient [75]. 
At Monash University the Information Technology department 
has a project focusing on “Multi Modal Medical AI” which 
centred on how computer-based decision procedures under 
AI can assist in improving health and wellbeing [76]. 

Australian company Saluda Medical is pioneering technology 
using novel AI and electroceutical technology to record and 
measure the body’s response to electrical nerve stimulation 
travelling up and down the spine in real time, to enable better 
targeting and management of chronic pain. Australian start-up 
Maxwell Plus is working with CSIRO, radiology specialist 
I-MED and Austin Health to develop and commercialise 
technology for identifying early-stage Alzheimer’s disease 
[77], using Maxwell’s AI platform to automatically form a 
view of a patient’s overall health and combine this with 
brain imaging tools. 

36 

Artificial Intelligence

8.2.1  PROBLEMS TO SOLVE
In 2018 there were 1,137 road deaths in Australia [81]. Many of 
these deaths resulted from human error including speeding 
and drunk driving. In 2014-15 nearly 57,000 Australians 
were hospitalised as the result of injuries sustained in car/
vehicle crashes [82]. The estimated annual economic cost 
of road crashes in Australia is $27 billion with significant 
and devastating social impacts [83]. Furthermore, traffic 
congestion in the year 2015 cost the Australian economy an 
estimated $16.5 billion [84]. Without major policy changes or 
advancements, congestion costs are predicted to be between 
$27.7 billion and $37.3 billion per annum by 2030 [85]. 

The application of AI and related technologies could be 
transformative for safety. A study drawing upon United States 
Federal Government road safety datasets found that collision 
avoidance technologies such as autonomous emergency 
braking, forward collision warning and lane departure 
correction could prevent or reduce the severity of 1.3 million 
crashes per year [86]. Another study of US highways found 
autonomous emergency braking combined with forward 
warning collision systems decreased front-to-rear injury 
accidents on United States highways by 56% [87]. There are 
also significant improvements to travel speed and convenience. 
Traffic light optimisation systems can reduce travel time by 
25%, braking by 30% and idling by 40% [88]. 

Autonomous emergency braking combined 
with forward warning collision systems 
decreased front-to-rear injury accidents  
on United States highways by 56%.

Energy security concerns and power outages continue to 
impact Australian towns and cities. Australian electricity 
consumers pay retail prices that are 44% higher than a decade 
ago with network costs (poles and wires) contributing 40% 
of the price increase [89]. Further price rises are likely. In 2016 
electricity generation accounted for 35% of Australia’s national 
greenhouse gas emissions [90]. AI could help us use electricity 
more efficiently with economic and environmental benefits. 

Cybersecurity will be critical to the future of Australian cities. 
From the risk of compromised motor vehicles [91] to protection 
of the energy grid and healthcare systems, Australia will 
need to address a growing and complex arena of threats and 
challenges in the digital age. According to the Australian 
Cybersecurity Centre’s 2017 Threat Report, losses of over 
$20 million were incurred by Australian organisations due to 
business email compromise (up from $8.6 million in 2015/16) 
and government agencies responded to 734 individual cyber 
incidents affecting private sector systems of national interest 
and critical infrastructure [92]. Despite Australian investment in 
security infrastructure increasing by 8% in 2017 (now totalling 
$89.1 billion) the number of targeted attacks doubled from the 
preceding year [93]. Approximately five million Australians are 
victims of cybercrime each year [94]. The potential for AI to 
help accelerate Australia’s fight against cybercrime is high. 

High construction costs and unplanned cost overruns are 
limiting our ability to improve our cities and infrastructure. 
A recent study by the Grattan Institute [95] found that 
Australian Government expenditure on transport infrastructure 
over the last decade has been “unprecedented” exceeding 
1% of GDP each year since 2009. The Grattan Institute study 
also found that 65% of major road infrastructure projects 
had cost overruns representing billions of dollars. A recent 
Productivity Commission report [96] into public infrastructure 
in Australia found that “there are numerous examples of poor 
value for money arising from inadequate project selection, 
potentially costing Australia billions of dollars” and that 
“there is an urgent need to comprehensively overhaul 
processes for assessing and developing public infrastructure 
projects”. A study by the University of Sydney reports that 
$63 billion of road infrastructure projects in Australia delivered 
no identifiable improvement on economic output [97] and 
were of questionable economic value. 

AI can be used to help us plan, build and operate our 
infrastructure more efficiently. AI can allow us to sweat existing 
infrastructure assets harder and ensure we prioritise new 
infrastructure projects of maximum benefit to the nation. 

37

8.2.2  AUSTRALIAN CAPABILITIES
The shift toward smart cities and infrastructure is a global 
phenomenon with many actors developing and implementing 
solutions. Our analysis has identified Australian organisations 
and teams who are world leaders in developing, advancing 
and deploying AI solutions which improve cities and 
infrastructure. While not wholly exhaustive, the following 
examples and applications illustrate the foundational basis 
from which Australia can amplify its capability and establish 
comparative advantages.

There is an opportunity in Australia to develop connected and 
automated vehicle (CAV) technology using both cellular V2X 
and dedicated short range communications (DSRC) [98]. V2X is 
a technology which allows vehicles to communicate with traffic 
infrastructure and other vehicles. The connectivity component 
of automated vehicle design is where Australia could 
potentially play a role in the global marketplace. This is an 
area in which Australia is developing world-leading capability. 
For example, the Queensland Department of Transport and 
Main Roads is trialling Cooperative Intelligent Transport 
Systems (C-ITS) in the City of Ipswich. This will see 500 vehicles 
retrofitted with C-ITS devices to improve their safety and the 
efficiency of the road-network [99]. In another example the 
Adelaide based company Cohda Wireless supply hardware and 
software used in over 60% of V2X trials globally [100, 101]. 

A related longstanding Australian innovation is the Sydney 
Coordinated Adaptive Traffic System (SCATS). This can be used 
to coordinate road signals and optimise vehicle flow across 
an entire town, city or region. This Australian developed 
technology has been in use for 40 years in 27 countries 
worldwide [102].

In another area of AI application, a University of Newcastle 
team is researching crowd movements, specifically pedestrian 
flows, and is including insights into a statistical model which 
can simulate the movements of crowds [103]. These insights 
and models could be used to improve public safety as well as 
building use via improved design of urban and architectural 
space. PSMA Australia is leveraging satellite imagery, big 
data and artificial intelligence technologies to create a digital 
representation of Australia’s built environment (mapping 
buildings, solar panels, swimming pools, tree heights and 
other features) [104]. 

Perth is currently undergoing a trial of on-demand  
automated cars, with the Western Australia government 
partnering with the Royal Automotive Club and French 
company NAVYA [105]. Rio Tinto is also leading the way in 
developing an automated train consisting of three locomotives 
capable of carrying approximately 28,000 tonnes of iron ore 
over 280 kilometres [106]. 

Emesent, a spin out from CSIRO’s Data61, has developed 
an AI-driven LIDAR system, which is mounted to a drone to 
quickly produce 3D maps of assets, offering better and faster 
3D modelling for construction, maintenance and mining 
applications. The system is capable of navigating complex  
GPS-denied underground mines and tunnels while creating 
three dimensional maps, or can be sent to map physical assets 
such as towers, limiting the need for humans to perform these 
tasks, which are often risky or time consuming [107]. 

38 

Artificial Intelligence

8.2.3  OPPORTUNITIES TO EXPORT
Analysis by AlphaBeta advisors indicates data-driven urban 
management will become a $20 billion to $30 billion global 
market by 2028 (with $5 billion to $10 billion in Asia-Pacific), 
while the market for cyber-physical security is likely to generate 
global revenue of $30 billion to $40 billion and Asia-Pacific 
market revenue of $10 billion to $15 billion [70]. 

Increasing rates of urbanisation, growing populations, 
limited resources and digital connectedness of critical 
infrastructure systems is a global phenomenon. By 2050 the 
global population will reach 9.8 billion with two-thirds living 
in cities [108] and almost 52% of the world’s people will live in 
water-stressed areas [109]. By 2040 energy consumption will 
increase by almost 50% [110]. 

By 2030 it is expected the world will have 43 megacities with 
more than 10 million inhabitants [111]. In Asia alone, more than 
600 million additional people are expected to move to cities 
by 2030 [112]. By 2020 it is estimated 20 to 30 billion objects 
will be connected to the internet-of-things requiring enhanced 
cyber-physical security solutions. According to the World Bank, 
global infrastructure spending needs to reach US$97 trillion 
by 2040 and current predictions identify a shortfall of 
US$19 trillion [113]. 

Worldwide the automated vehicle market  
is expected to be worth US$173.15 billion  
by the year 2030.

Worldwide the automated vehicle market is expected 
to be worth US$173.15 billion by the year 2030 [98, 114]. 
Whilst counties such as South Korea, Germany and the United 
States are taking the lead in the design and manufacturing 
of automated cars there is much opportunity for Australia. 
This is a huge and diverse marketplace with countless 
niches and satellite industries which go beyond just making 
automated cars. For example, vehicle-to-vehicle and 
vehicle-to-infrastructure communication is an important niche 
within the automated car sector which Australia could fill. 

The rapid rate of urbanisation across the globe combined with 
the increased human mobility and the digital connectivity of 
city infrastructure will be associated with strong demand for 
AI solutions.

39

8.3  AI for Better Natural 
Resource Management
This specialisation involves the use of AI technologies to 
improve the economic efficiency and decrease the ecological 
footprint of agriculture, mining and environmental 
management. For agriculture this could involve on-farm 
robotics for harvesting, seeding, soil tillage, crop monitoring, 
weed removal, pest removal and chemical treatment 
(fertilisers, herbicides and pesticides). 

AI enabled information tools and robotics could be used 
for more precise agricultural operations to enhance the 
productivity, resilience and environmental performance of 
farms. Automated mine site operations including haulage, 
extraction, processing, digging and drilling may use robotics 
and a range of related AI technologies. Computer vision 
and automated systems could be used for monitoring and 
improving the safety of minesite operations. Enhanced 
mineral discovery will be possible using machine learning and 
computer vision techniques to process remote sensing imagery 
and geological data. Within the environmental management 
sphere, improved weather and climate forecasting systems 
which use machine learning and data science approaches 
could more accurately predict temporal and spatial weather 
patterns. AI will also allow enhanced systems for monitoring 
the condition of biodiversity and ecological assets and 
robotic systems for predicting, detecting and physically 
managing threats. 

40 

Artificial Intelligence

Many species of pest animal and weed have become partially 
or fully resistant to pesticides and herbicides. This means 
spraying is ineffective. For example, the Grains Research and 
Development Corporation recently found “Australia has the 
second highest number of herbicide-resistant weeds in the 
world—sitting only just behind the United States [and that] 
twenty-five weed species have been confirmed resistant to one 
or more herbicides across Australia’s cropping regions” [119]. 
This is a significant problem for farmers who have previously 
relied on chemical treatment.

In mining there’s an opportunity to reduce production costs via 
automation and AI technologies. The Australian Government 
Resources 2030 Taskforce report [120] outlines how multiple 
technologies (including automation) can be used to improve 
productivity and safety, while maintaining environmental and 
labour practices. The taskforce report notes that data science 
and predictive technologies will play an increasingly important 
role in Australian mining. AI technologies could also assist 
mine restoration activities once mining operations cease.

Another challenge is the discovery of new mineral resources. 
Australian mineral ore grades are in gradual and permanent 
decline [121]. For example, the gold ore grade in Australia 
has fallen from around 30 grams per tonne in the late 
1800s, to around 3 grams per tonne today [121]. Discovery of 
economically viable new mineral deposits is becoming more 
difficult. Data from MinEX [122] consulting show that discovery 
costs for major metals such as gold, nickel, zinc, lead and 
copper have all been increasing over the past 20 years and 
are forecast to continue rising. Finding ways to explore and 
discover minerals at lower costs is an important priority for 
the mining sector. Machine learning techniques will play 
an increasingly important role in discovering harder-to-find 
mineral deposits [123]. 

8.3.1  PROBLEMS TO SOLVE
One of the challenges (and opportunities) already facing 
Australian agriculture is its shrinking and ageing workforce. 
The median age of the Australian farmer is 56 years, which is 
up from 54 years a decade ago, and 17 years above the average 
worker age of 39 years [115]. The agricultural workforce has 
shrunk by 23,000 workers in the last decade from 356,000 
persons in 2008 to 333,000 persons in 2018 [116]. Over the 
longer term it shows a declining trend. A smaller workforce 
requires increased productivity per worker. AI enablement 
can help. For example, robotic harvesting, seeding and weed 
removal devices can reduce the workload for human farmers. 
Robotics can remove many of the hard manual on-farm tasks. 
This can allow continued growth in agricultural production 
despite a declining and ageing workforce. 

In addition to a shrinking workforce, rural industries are 
confronted with a cost price-squeeze. Also known as the 
declining terms of trade, this is a well-known challenge 
for Australian farmers. It relates to the prices of inputs 
(such as fuel, machinery, fertiliser) growing faster than the 
prices received for outputs (the food and fibre they sell). 
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics 
and Sciences notes over the past 40 years farmers have faced 
a general decline in their terms of trade [117], which is likely to 
continue. To stay profitable, farmers need to boost productivity 
and/or reduce costs. AI enablement via information tools, 
precision agriculture, robotics and other technologies allows 
for more efficient and less labour intensive farming models. 
It can help Australian farmers beat the cost-price squeeze. 
Australian agriculture will also benefit from AI enabled 
logistical efficiency. Many agricultural supply chains are 
relatively inefficient due to relatively low volumes and high 
transport distances.

Drought will be a challenge for future farmers. 
According to the Bureau of Meteorology, 2018 was the third 
hottest year on record, and rainfall was approximately 11% 
below average with significant agricultural areas experiencing 
severe drought conditions [118]. Long range climate forecasts 
suggest Australia will become hotter and drier with more 
extremes. AI technologies will improve weather forecasts and 
climate adaptation via more controlled and precise farming 
systems. Advanced irrigation systems can improve the timing 
and location of crop and pasture watering. AI may also help 
crop geneticists identify strains of wheat and other species that 
are drought resistant. 

41

Within all primary industries there is an imperative to improve 
worker safety. According to Safe Work Australia [124] the 
accident fatality rate for workers in agriculture, forestry and 
fishing industries in Australia is the highest of all our  
19 industries at 16.9 fatalities per 100,000 workers  
(averaged over the ten year period leading up to 2016).  
The mining industry has the third highest fatality rate  
(after transport, postal and warehousing) of four fatalities 
per 100,000 workers. The national average across all 
industries is 2.1 fatalities per 100,000 workers. Our primary 
industries have much higher fatality rates. There is an urgent 
need to reduce these fatality rates. AI has an important 
role to play. It can upgrade onsite safety via automated risk 
detection and management. AI can also remove people from 
hazardous environments. 

In terms of our biodiversity and ecosystem assets we face  
some intense pressures to protect and conserve. Australia has 

426 animal species and 1,339 plants currently threatened under 
the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation 
Act 1999 [125]. Deforestation across Australia is a major 
contributor to biodiversity declines. In 2015/16 Australia was 
one of the world’s top 10 countries in terms of deforestation 
– and almost 50% of Australian forests and woodlands have 
been cleared since European settlement [126]. The Great 
Barrier Reef is a national icon under threat. According to the 
Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS) coral cover on 
the central GBR declined from 22% in 2016 to 14% in 2018 with 
coral bleaching and crown of thorns starfish being the culprits 
[127]. The Queensland University of Technology’s COTSbot is 
an example of an AI technology already being used to protect 
the reef. This mobile aquatic device uses computer vision, 
machine learning and advanced robotics to autonomously 
detect and remove the crown-of-thorns starfish. Other such 
AI technologies are likely to be developed and applied to 
protect the reef. 

42 

Artificial Intelligence

8.3.2  AUSTRALIAN CAPABILITIES 
We found considerable expertise, arguably at the forefront 
of the world, within Australia relating to agriculture, mining 
and environmental management AI technologies. One of 
the world’s leading agricultural robots is AgBot II developed 
by the Queensland University of Technology. Fully designed 
and developed by Australian researchers, AgBot II is a solar 
powered robotic device which can (a) detect and mechanically 
remove weeds; (b) apply fertilisers and chemical treatments; 
and (c) gather detailed information about growing conditions 
and crop vitality. There is a comprehensive body of AI research 
behind AgBot II which has been published in international 
research journals [128, 129]. The QUT Robotics and Autonomous 
Systems Group is a large team of researchers, academics and 
students located in Brisbane. 

The Australian Centre for Field Robotics 
(ACFR) at the University of Sydney is one 
of the largest robotics centres in the world.

The Australian Centre for Field Robotics (ACFR) at the 
University of Sydney is one of the largest robotics centres in the 
world. The ACFR “focuses on the research, development and 
application of autonomous and intelligent robots, and systems 
for use in outdoor environments” [130]. The technologies 
developed by ACFR are in four core areas (1) sensors, fusion and 
perception (2) movement, control and decisions (3) modelling, 
learning and adapting and (4) architectures, systems and 
cooperation of robotics and intelligent systems [130]. The ACFR 
is housed within the Faculty of Engineering and Information 
Technologies at the University of Sydney. 

CSIRO, Australia’s national science agency, has a long history 
of developing autonomous systems to improve the safety and 
efficiency of all aspects of mining and minerals discovery. 
For example, the majority of new underground coal mines in 
Australia use the longwall automation technology developed 
by CSIRO’s Data61 which improves safety and productivity. 
This world leading technology has been licenced by five global 
mining companies. Other AI related mining technologies 
developed by CSIRO include tracking systems for underground 
mines, wearable technology to give remote mineworkers 
expert/visual guidance on complex tasks and continuous miner 
navigation systems. 

Large Australian based mining companies such as Rio 
Tinto, BHP, Fortescue Metals and others are already at the 
forefront globally in developing and applying automated 
minesite technology.

Mining operations in the Pilbara region of Western Australia 
are amongst the world’s most automated. Within this region 
Fortescue operates 112 driverless trucks with a reported 
30% productivity gain [131]. Australian mining company 
BHP has 50 autonomous trucks at its Jimblebar site and 
20 autonomous drills in Western Australia [131]. Launched in 
2008 Rio Tinto’s mine-of-the-future has 140 automated trucks, 
over 11 automated drills and 60% of train kilometres are in 
autonomous mode [132].

CASE STUDY –  
Orefox
Emerging companies in Australia are at the forefront of global efforts 
to use machine learning and related AI technologies to bring down the 
costs of minerals exploration. Orefox is a Brisbane-based technology 
company using machine learning and artificial intelligence to analyse 
large amounts of geophysical data and discover mineral deposits [4]. 

Orefox have gone to market with their proprietary AI-enabled mineral 
exploration system that has been trained on economic gold deposits. 
The Queensland University of Technology, ESRI and Unearthed are 
shareholders, sponsors and supporters of Orefox.

43

8.3.3  OPPORTUNITIES TO EXPORT
Across the world and especially within the Asia-Pacific 
region agricultural production is expanding to meet 
demand. The global food system will be expected to increase 
production by as much as 35% by 2030 from a 2015 baseline 
[133]. Furthermore, the global food production system is 
challenged with climate variability, water availability, land 
availability, crop disease, livestock disease and herbicide/
pesticide resistance. AI-enabled systems will play a critical role 
in allowing the world to produce more food and fibre within 
tighter environmental constraints. This means a growth in 
demand for agricultural robotics, precision agriculture systems, 
data driven farming methods and a wide range of AI-enabled 
agricultural technologies. Australian companies developing 
these technologies are likely to find large marketplaces. 

The global food system will be expected 
to increase production by as much as 
35% by 2030 from a 2015 baseline.

Australia’s mining engineering technology and services 
(METS) sector has already grown substantially. This sector is 
increasingly developing AI-related mining industry products. 
According to industry body Austmine, the Australian METS 
sector generates $90 billion in revenue, employs 400,000 
people, and exports to more than 200 countries [134].  
The coming decade is likely to see the continued development 
of high quality mineral ore deposits in Africa, Asia and South 
America. The new mining operations are likely to use AI in 
mineral exploration and operational phases of development. 
There will be vast opportunities to grow exports of Australian 
mining AI to the world. 

Biodiversity loss, climate change and other environmental 
problems are escalating across the globe. As the newly 
industrialised countries (particularly in Asia), become 
wealthy they are actively looking for ways to manage the 
environmental impacts of rapid industrialisation. China, for 
example, has a commitment to improving air quality in cities 
and regions. China’s air pollution action plan is targeting 
a 33% improvement in air quality in Beijing by 2020 [135]. 
Right across the Asia-Pacific we are seeing a rapid and sizeable 
introduction of biodiversity and environmental conservation 
programs. The implementation of these programs will be aided 
by AI technology. Australia is well placed to develop these AI 
technologies and sell the solutions into global markets. 

44 

Artificial Intelligence

45

46 

Artificial Intelligence

9  FOUNDATIONS 
FOR THE FUTURE

For Australia to take full advantage of the potential benefits of 
AI technologies it will be critical to build the right environment 
for effective adoption, adaptation and development. Actions 
are required to remove barriers and capture opportunities for 
growth. These actions are relevant for government, industry 
and community organisations. 

9.1  Developing an AI 
Specialist Workforce
In preparing this report, we analysed over 4 million Australian 
job advertisements since 2014 of which 5,200 were classified 
as being closely related to AI. We crossed referenced this data 
with other datasets to forecast trends in Australia’s emerging 
AI workforce. We found that Australia currently has 6,600 AI 
specialist workers. This is up from 650 AI workers in 2014 and 
future growth is expected. We estimate that by 2030 Australian 
industry will require a workforce of between 32,000 to 161,000 
employees in computer vision, robotics, human language 
technologies, data science and other areas of AI expertise. 
There is a wide range of future possibilities due to uncertainty 
about the extent of scientific advances and the extent of 
technology adoption by industry. 

In addition to overall growth Australia’s AI workforce is likely 
to become more geographically dispersed. In 2015 we estimate 
that 89% of AI jobs were in Sydney and Melbourne. However, 
by 2018 the share of Sydney and Melbourne AI jobs had fallen 
to 75% of the total as Brisbane, Canberra, Adelaide and Perth 
grew their relative shares. Some regional areas such as Ballarat, 
outback South Australia and the NSW Central Coast also saw 
strong growth in AI Workers. This is likely to continue. There 
will be substantial job opportunities for Australian AI workers 
in both capital cities and regional areas by the year 2030. 

The new AI workforce is needed to meet the operational 
requirements of industry. Already supply is failing to meet 
demand. For example, Australia had an estimated 301,000 
data scientists in 2017 and that figure is expected to grow by 
2.4% each year until 2022. This contrasts with average annual 
job growth for the entire labour force of 1.5%. Data science 
workers with postgraduate IT qualifications are expected to 
see average annual salaries rise from approximately $111,634 to 
$130,176 in this period [136].

Australia had an estimated 
301,000 data scientists in 2017 
and that figure is expected to 
grow by 2.4% each year until 2022.

Advanced mathematics and computational logic are core skills 
required within AI. The evidence from education research 
suggests we need to build these skills early. For example, a 
longitudinal study [137] of 1,364 children in the United States 
by Researchers at the University of California–Irvine found 
that mathematical skills at age 4.5 years accurately predicts 
mathematics achievement at age 15 years. The study also found 
improvement in mathematical skills from kindergarten to first-
year was an even better predictor of adolescent mathematics 
capability. This and other similar studies [138] provide strong 
evidence for improving the quality of mathematics knowledge 
and skills in kindergarten, prep and junior school in Australia. 

Of importance are skills in advanced mathematics which are 
needed for AI development and application. However, data 
from the Programme for International Student Assessment 
(PISA) published by the Australian Council for Educational 
Research (ACER) shows that Australia’s relative ranking in 
mathematics skills, compared to other countries, has been 
declining since the year 2003. According to ACER the PISA 
survey is an assessment of the ability of 15 year-olds to  
use mathematics skills to meet real life challenges [139].  
Given that mathematics is a foundational skill for AI, this trend 
is of concern. 

Overall, Australia needs to train and educate an entire new AI 
specialist workforce to meet the current and future operational 
needs of industry. Schools, universities, technical colleges and 
private training providers will all play a role in developing 
these skills. The training imperative relates to young and old 
workers at all stages of learning. This will require a mix of 
strategies catering to the unique needs of individuals. 

47

Australia’s ICT Workforce 
According to a recent study by Deloitte Access Economics and the Australian Computer Society [3] the entire information, 
communications and technology (ICT) sector workforce – which is closely aligned to the AI workforce – contained 
663,100 workers in year 2018. This is up 3.5% or an additional 22,300 workers from the previous year. 

Demand for ICT workers is forecast to grow to a total of 758,700 workers by 2023 at a rate of 20,000 additional workers 
per year. This represents a challenge for Australia. 

Australia produces only 5,000 domestic ICT university graduates per year. Whilst not the full supply of ICT skilled workers 
this falls well short of industry demand.

However, the prospects for developing AI specialist skills are good. Our analysis found that within Australia’s ICT workforce 
there are approximately 500,000 workers who have the right foundational skills and aptitudes to specialise in AI.  
This includes around 470,000 people already working in the top ten AI-relevant occupations such as software 
programming, computer networking, web development and ICT management [10], prime candidates for upskilling in AI.

9.2  Career Transitions 
and Skills Upgrades
Most Australian workers won’t need to develop AI specialist 
skills; however, their jobs are likely to be impacted in some  
way by AI and related digital technologies. According to a 
recent report from the World Economic Forum [140] AI will 
displace 75 million jobs and create 133 million new jobs leading 
to a net increase of 58 million new jobs by the year 2022 in the 
world economy. 

This is creating a career retraining and transition imperative. 
A recent study by Google and consulting firm AlphaBeta [141] 
found Australian workers will, on average, need to increase 
time spent learning new skills by 33% over their lifetime and 
that job tasks will change 18% per decade. The need to upskill 
is primarily because digital technology (including AI) will shift 
the workforce skills demand profile. Some of the new skills 
needed will be of a technical nature. However, as AI uptake 
increases there will be considerable emphasis on human skills 
such as creativity, judgement, reasoning, communication and 
emotional intelligence. 

Australian workers will, on average, need 
to increase time spent learning new skills 
by 33% over their lifetime and that job 
tasks will change 18% per decade.

Whilst previous generations needed literacy and numeracy 
to get practically any type of job, future workers will also 
need digital literacy. Digital literacy implies an ability to 
interact with, and effectively use, advanced information and 
communication technologies. However, these three capabilities 
of literacy, numeracy and digital literacy won’t be enough for 
most workers. To get the right job in the right place with the 
right salary and good career prospects people will need  
well-rounded skills and well-rounded knowledge. 

For example, a study by researchers at Harvard University [142] 
found that between 1980 to 2012 jobs involving high levels of 
social interaction increased by 12%. In contrast they found that 
math-intensive but less social jobs shrank by 3.3%. Although 
relating to a dataset over seven years old this study does show 
the importance of softer skills alongside pure mathematics 
and/or technical skills. Another study by researchers at Indiana 
University in the United States found that “in an increasingly 
data-driven economy, the demand for soft social skills, like 
teamwork and communication, increase with greater demand 
for hard technical skills and tools” [143].

Overall digitisation and automation of tasks will require 
workers to transition their careers from lower-demand areas 
to higher-demand areas. Individual workers, governments and 
companies can take actions – such as retraining, upskilling 
and reskilling – to make earlier (and better) career transitions. 
There will be a mix of technical and human/social skills and 
knowledge needed by employers. Technical skills on their own 
may not be enough to get a desired job. 

48 

Artificial Intelligence

Workforce upskilling – 
Micro-credentialing
One of the strategies helping existing workers acquire 
critical skills for the future is micro-credentialing. 
A growing number of Australian universities are offering 
micro-credentials to provide workers with digital skills 
via short, sharp and highly targeted training programs. 

For example, with campuses in Sydney, Brisbane, 
Melbourne, the Blue Mountains, Adelaide and 
Auckland, Torrens University is partnering with IBM to 
deliver both degree programs and micro-credentials 
in cloud computing, big data and AI [5]. 

In another example the University of New England 
in Armidale is offering bespoke courses which allow 
students to choose specific subjects they need to 
acquire specific skills and knowledge relevant to their 
career trajectories. Many of the bespoke courses are 
in areas relevant to data science and AI [8]. 

9.3  Data Governance and Access
In most applications, AI depends on large, detailed and diverse 
datasets. Machine learning applications often need a “training 
dataset” which allows the algorithm to be designed, tested 
and improved before being applied in the real world. Access 
to training datasets has become one of the most critical and 
complex stages of AI development. 

For example, Google company DeepMind started working 
with the United Kingdom Royal Free Hospital in 2016 
to detect and diagnose acute kidney injuries (AKI) with 
machine learning techniques [144]. The main challenge for 
this life-saving technology was not designing the machine 
learning algorithms; the main challenge was handling 1.6 
million detailed patient medical records with sufficient levels 
of privacy protection. The United Kingdom Information 
Commission (ICO) identified some concerns relating to patient 
awareness and consent about how their private data was being 
used [145]. Development of these technologies will depend on 
all parties involved resolving the legal, ethical and practical 
challenges of data access. A large number of highly beneficial, 
and life-saving, AI applications in health, transport, law 
enforcement and other sectors hinge upon data governance. 

Better access to high quality, labelled datasets will improve the 
training ground for AI systems. There are already substantial 
open data and related initiatives happening in Australia, 
examples include data.gov.au and the Australian National 
Data Service, but more can be done. AI developers also need 
certainty and guidance around what represents ethical and 
acceptable use of private data. This requires attention to 
“data creep”; the gradual increase in the comprehensiveness 
and granularity of data held by organisations about people 
which, when cross-referenced to other data, provides 
even more detailed personal insights. Organisations will 
increasingly be challenged with achieving data integrity 
whereby people’s private and confidential information is 
properly protected and managed. Issues related to the ethical 
handling of data within the context of AI are covered in more 
detail in the AI ethics framework [146].

49

9.4  Building Trust in AI
Trust will be essential to achieve widespread adoption of AI and 
this has been the focus of the Australian Government’s AI Ethics 
Framework released in 2019 for public consultation. 

Three main issues have been identified which make trust 
important for AI adoption. Firstly, an AI system typically involves 
the surrender of some level of human control to a machine. 
The user needs to trust that the AI will do the task at least as 
well as, if not better than, a human in terms of safety, efficiency 
and overall quality. Secondly, many AI systems acquire, analyse, 
transmit and store private and confidential data. The user needs 
to trust the AI system won’t inappropriately divulge or delete 
personal information. Thirdly, due to the complexity of its 
internal workings AI is often a black-box to users; people can’t 
easily know how advanced AI is working. The user will need 
to trust that the AI product is doing what it is supposed to do; 
they won’t be able to see or verify its operations. These three 
factors mean that AI developers have a significant trust hurdle 
to clear, including perceived risk, before consumers use (and 
buy) their products. 

For example, the driver of an automated vehicle needs 
considerable trust before surrendering control to the machine. 
So too do the traffic authorities. People are likely to insist 
upon higher standards of comfort and safety performance 
for automated cars compared to human driven cars. A survey 
conducted by the American Automobile Association [147] shortly 
after the fatal Uber automated car incident in March 2018 found 
that trust in automated cars is declining (not increasing).  
The survey found that 64 percent of millennials would not 
ride in a self-driving car; up from 49 percent previously. Older 
generations are even more distrustful with 71 percent of baby-
boomers and 68 percent of generation-x indicating they did 
not feel safe in an automated car. Widespread adoption of 
automated vehicles won’t happen until people trust the products. 

Researchers from Zeppelin University in Germany studied how 
people develop trust in AI within transport and healthcare 
settings [148]. They used a case study approach which examined 
the Daimler Future Trucks 2025 project, BMW automated cars, 
the use of IBM’s Watson in healthcare settings, the Care-O-bot 
robotic device developed by the Fraunhoffer Institute to care 
for the elderly in their homes and several other AI products. 
The researchers find that trust needs to be achieved by the AI 
developer in two ways: (a) trust in the technology and (b) trust 
in the company. Trust in the technology comes from building 
effective user interfaces, product manuals, scientific data, 
technical explanations, scientific reviews and visible trials. 
Trust in the company comes from the company’s track record 
of prior success and failure with AI products which builds a 
reputation over time. Trust in the company also comes from 
their overall level of transparency. 

50 

Artificial Intelligence

9.5  Science, Research and 
Technology Development
As a new and emerging field of science and technology 
both pure and applied R&D is needed to unlock the benefits 
of AI for Australia. Many proposed AI systems represent 
early stage ideas or theories about what may be possible. 
However, they cannot be safely or effectively applied in the 
real world because we lack sufficient knowledge to make 
them work properly. For example, if we are to achieve level 
five automated cars (i.e. fully automated in all conditions) we 
need scientific breakthroughs in computer vision and machine 
learning which have not yet happened. Such breakthroughs 
depend on pure theoretical research in mathematics, physics 
and other scientific fields. 

We will also need applied R&D to identify how to implement 
many off-the-shelf AI products within the context of existing 
supply chains or business processes. That’s because a novel 
AI system may involve a very different way of doing business. 
For many companies AI is an unknown quantity offering 
substantial opportunity but also risk. Implementation of AI 
systems typically requires an intensive process of trial and 
error involving applied R&D to determine what works and 
what does not work. In all areas of application R&D will allow 
us to conceive, design, build and test experimental AI systems 
in novel contexts. 

R&D can be viewed as a pipeline of future 
opportunity for the Australian economy. 

The most recent OECD data shows Australia spent 1.9% of GDP 
on all types of R&D compared to the OECD average at 2.4% 
and China at 2.1% [149]. In the fiscal year ending June 2016 
all of Australia’s businesses combined spent $16.7 billion on 
all types of R&D [150]. However, companies such as Amazon 
($31 billion/yr), Alphabet (Google) ($22 billion/yr), Intel 
($17 billion/yr) and Microsoft ($17 billion/yr) [151] are spending 
heavily on R&D; much of which is AI related. Alibaba, 
Tencent and Baidu from China are also making large AI R&D 
investments as are many companies worldwide. 

The investments being made by these companies fund deep, 
blue-sky and discovery science in addition to applied research. 
These, and other such, companies will use their advanced AI 
technologies to compete with Australian companies at home 
and abroad. Many sectors of the Australian economy will 
need to put more into the research and development pipeline 
today to stay competitive by the year 2030. We’ll need R&D to 
unlock the value of this highly complex, novel and uncertain 
technological capability. 

Standards, Interoperability  

9.7 
and Ethics
The rise of AI will require new standards relating to AI system 
performance, safety, levels of transparency and explainability, 
autonomy, privacy, interoperability, data security, data 
acquisition, data ownership, data quality, data formats and 
data storage. The International Standards Organisation 
(ISO), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and 
Standards Australia (SA) are actively working in this area. 
Standards and system validation will be important ways for 
developing improved trust which will be vital for achieving 
widespread adoption of AI. In addition to standards is the 
issue of ethical application. AI represents an opportunity for 
improved fairness, transparency, equality of opportunity and 
overall ethical outcomes. However, it is a powerful technology 
and comes with risks for negative outcomes. An AI Ethics 
discussion paper [146] accompanies this document. It provides 
a set of principles and tools for ethical AI supported by 
numerous case studies. 

9.6  Digital Infrastructure 
and Cybersecurity
Digital infrastructure is needed for the acquisition, 
transmission, storage and analysis of data. AI won’t work, 
and can’t be developed, where there’s insufficient digital 
infrastructure. This includes a requirement for access to secure 
high performance computing and the development of sensory 
systems in addition to fast internet connectivity. For example, 
the development and application of agricultural robotics will 
be limited in rural areas without sufficient connectivity. Due 
to the vast areas of remote land with low population density 
Australia is challenged with ensuring cost effective high speed 
internet across the entire continent. As part of AI enablement, 
we will need to target digital infrastructure upgrades to 
geographic regions and industry sectors where needed. 

The Australian Government Department of Communication 
and the Arts administers the Mobile Black Spot Program and 
the Regional Connectivity Program which provide funding 
to improve telecommunications across Australia. The Mobile 
Black Spot Program is investing in mobile telecommunications 
infrastructure to improve mobile coverage; especially along 
major regional transport routes and in small communities. The 
Regional Connectivity Program is being developed to target 
investment in a range of technologies to maximise economic 
opportunities and region-wide benefits for regional, rural and 
remote Australians. These and other such programs will help 
develop digital infrastructure vital for the AI enablement of the 
Australian economy. 

Another critical requirement for AI enablement relates to 
cybersecurity. The shift from human controlled to AI systems 
is associated with an increased cybersecurity hazard. AI will 
also be used by cybercriminals to create new forms of risk and 
vulnerability. Achieving higher levels of cybersecurity, and 
developing entirely new systems of cybersecurity, will be vital 
for achieving AI enablement of the Australian economy.

51

52 

Artificial Intelligence

10  CONCLUSION

Humanity is in the process of building machines which have the 
ability to learn themselves without explicit human guidance.  
AI is already coding its own AI. We are witnessing the 
convergence of powerful technologies with unknown future 
possibilities. That’s why the world is waking up to AI and that’s 
why this document has been written. The ability of the machine 
to learn represents a new way to solve our most challenging 
problems. This can boost the productivity of Australian industry 
and improve the quality of life enjoyed by current and future 
generations of Australians. 

53

54 

Artificial Intelligence

11  REFERENCES

Eggleton, M. 2019. The megatrends shaping our future (28 
May). The Australian Financial Review. Sydney.

16.  AIHW. 2016. Skin Cancer in Australia. Australian Institute 

of Health and Welfare. Canberra.

1. 

2. 

Pope, N. 2018. Technology improves independence for 
people with disability. Disability Support Guide. Adelaide.

3.  Deloitte Access Economics. 2018. Australia’s digital pulse: 
Driving Australia’s international ICT competitiveness and 
digital growth. Australian Computer Society. Sydney, 
Australia.

4.  OreFox. OreFox Company Website accessed on 1 Feb 2019. 

Orefox Pty Ltd. Brisbane, Australia.

5. 

6. 

7. 

Torrens University. 2019. Partnership with IBM. Torrens 
University Australia (Website https://www.torrens.edu.au/
about/partnerships/ibm). Sydney.

RMIT. 2018. Computers use social media data to predict 
crime. RMIT University. Melbourne.

Garnsey, E. and P. Heffernan. 2005. High-technology 
clustering through spin-out and attraction: The 
Cambridge case. Regional Studies 39(8):1127-1144.

8.  UNE. 2019. Study just the parts of a degree you need - 
UNE New Bespoke Courses. University of New England 
(Website: www.une.edu.au/bespokecourses). Armidale, 
New South Wales.

9.  Naughton, J. 2013. They call it Silicon Fen. So what is the 
special draw of Cambridge? (1 December). The Gaurdian 
Newspaper. Sydney.

10.  ABS. 2018. Labour force, Australia (Catalogue Number 
6202.0). Australian Bureau of Statistics. Canberra.

11.  PwC. 2019. Sizing the prize: PwC’s Global Artificial 

Intelligence Study: Exploiting the AI Revolution. Price 
Waterhouse Coopers. London.

12.  Vision2020. 2019. A snapshot of blindness and low vision 
services in Australia. Vision 2020 - The Right to Sight 
Australia. Melbourne.

13.  AIHW. 2018. Older Australia at a glance. Australian 

Institute of Health and Welfare. Canberra.

14.  QUT. 2019. AgBot II Robotic Site-specific Crop and Weed 
Management Tool. Queensland University of Technology 
(Website accessed 10 Sept 2019). Brisbane.

15.  Robinson, J. and P. Thorn. 2018. Do chatbots have a role to 
play in suicide prevention? The Conversation (24 October). 
Australia.

17.  Esteva, A., B. Kuprel, R.A. Novoa, J. Ko, S.M. Swetter, H.M. 
Blau, and S. Thrun. 2017. Dermatologist-level classification 
of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature 542:115.

18.  AlphaBeta. 2018. Digital innovation: Australia’s $315B 

opportunity. AlphaBeta. Sydney.

19.  Sentance, R. 2018. The future of voice search: 2020 and 
beyond. Econsultancy. London, United Kingdom.

20.  Olson, C. 2016. Just say it: The future of search is voice 

and personal digital assistants. Campaign. London, United 
Kingdom.

21.  Ballard, D. and C. Brown. 1982. Computer Vision. Prentice-

Hall. Edgewood Cliffs, New Jersey.

22.  Goodfellow, I.J., J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. 
Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A.C. Courville, and Y. Bengio. 
2014. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural 
Information Processing Systems:2672-2680.

23.  Kubota, T. 2017. Stanford algorithm can diagnose 

pneumonia better than radiologists. Stanford News. 
United States.

24.  Nau, D., M. Ghallab, and P. Traverso. 2004. Automated 

planning: Theory and practice. Cambridge University 
Press. United Kingdom.

25. 

Jiménez, S., T.D.L. Rosa, S. Fernández, F. Fernández, and 
D. Borrajo. 2012. Review: A review of machine learning for 
automated planning. The Knowledge Engineering Review 
27(4):433-467.

26.  Walker, M.A., D.J. Litman, C.A. Kamm, and A. Abella. 

1997. Evaluating interactive dialogue systems: Extending 
component evaluation to integrated system evaluation. 
Interactive Spoken Dialog Systems on Bringing Speech 
and NLP Together in Real Applications:1-8.

27.  Martins, R. and F. Meneguzzi. 2014. A smart home 

model using JaCaMo framework. 12th IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Informatics:94-99.

28.  Tyran, C.K. and J.F. George. 1993. The implementation of 
expert systems: a survey of successful implementations. 
ACM SIGMIS Database: The DATABASE for Advances in 
Information Systems 24(1):5-15.

29.  Neelakantan, A. 2017. Knowledge representation 

and reasoning with deep neural networks. Doctoral 
Dissertation. University of Massachusetts Amherst.

55

30.  Schmidt, E. and J. Rosenberg. 2014. How Google Works. 

Grand Central Publishing. New York City.

31.  Treasury. 2015. Intergenerational Report: Australia 2055. 

44.  QUT. 2014. New centre will give robots the gift of sight 
(Media Release 18 March). Queensland University of 
Technology. Brisbane.

Commonwealth of Australia. Canberra.

45.  DIIS. 2019. Stocktake of Australian Innovation Precincts – 

32.  DIIS. 2018. Industry insights: Future productivity. Office of 
the Chief Economist, Department of Industry, Innovation 
and Science, Australian Government. Canberra.

33.  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 

Development. 2018. Main science and technology 
indicators, Volume 2018 Issue 1. Paris.

34.  Gurría, A. 2016. Launch of the OECD economic outlook, 
June 2016. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development. Paris.

35. 

Jones, C.I., P. Aghion, and B.F. Jones. 2017. Artificial 
intelligence and economic growth. Stanford Insititute for 
Economic Policy Research. U.S.A.

36.  Purdy, M. and P. Daugherty. 2016. Country spotlights: Why 

artificial intelligence is the future of growth. Accenture. 
Dublin, Ireland.

37.  McKinsey. 2017. Digital Australia: Seizing the opportunity 
from the Fourth Industrial Revolution. McKinsey and 
Company. Sydney.

38.  AlphaBeta. 2019. Australia’s digital opportunity - Growing 
a $122 billion a year tech industry. Consulting report 
prepared for DIGI (www.digi.org.au) by AlphaBeta. Sydney.

39.  OECD. 2019. Recommendation of the Council on 

Artificial Intelligence (5 May). Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development Legal Instruments. Paris.

40.  Treasury. 2018. Budget Strategy and Outlook 2018/19. 
Budget Paper Number #1. Australian Government. 
Canberra.

41.  CSIRO. 2018. CSIRO invests $35M in future of space and 

AI for Australia. Media Release 19 November. CSIRO. 
Canberra.

42.  UoA. 2017. New research institute for machine learning 
(9 December, Media Release on Website). University of 
Adelaide. Australia.

43.  ARC. 2019. Grant Outcomes dataset. Australian Research 

Council (Website). Canberra.

Including collaboration networks, university precincts and 
industry clusters. Australian Government Department of 
Innovation Industry and Science. Canberra.

46.  DIIS. 2018. Statement of Principles for Australian 

Innovation Precincts: Place-Based Partnerships Building 
on Competitive Strengths. Australian Government 
Department of Industry Innovation and Science. Canberra.

47.  Startup Muster. 2018. Startup Muster 2018 annual report. 

Sydney.

48.  Startup Muster. 2017. Startup Muster 2017 annual report. 

Sydney.

49.  Business. 2019. Grants, assistance & other support - Small 

and Medium Enterprises (SME) Export Hubs. Australian 
Government (business.gov.au). Canberra.

50.  Pianta, M. and V. Meliciani. 1996. Technological 

specialization and economic performance in oecd 
countries. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management 
8(2):157-174.

51. 

Jungmittag, A. 2004. Innovations, technological 
specialisation and economic growth in the EU. 
International Economics and Economic Policy 1(2):247-273.

52.  Archibugi, D. and M. Pianta. 1992. The technological 
specialisation of advanced countries: A Report to the 
EEC on international science and technology activities. 
Springer Science and Business Media. London.

53.  Evangelista, R., V. Meliciani, and A. Vezzani. 2018. 

Specialisation in key enabling technologies and regional 
growth in Europe. Economics of Innovation and New 
Technology 27(3):273-289.

54.  OECD. 2013. Innovation-driven growth in regions: The role 

of smart specialisation. 

55. 

ISA. 2017. Australia 2030: Prosperity through Innovation. 
Innovation and Science Australia (ISA), Australian 
Government. Canberra, Australia.

56.  Mazzucato, M. 2018. Mission-oriented innovation policies: 
challenges and opportunities. Industrial and Corporate 
Change 27(5):803-815.

56 

Artificial Intelligence

57. 

IIPP. 2019. A Mission-Oriented UK Industrial Strategy: 
UCL Commission for Mission-Oriented Innovation and 
Industrial Strategy. Institute for Innovation and Public 
Purpose. London.

58.  Paulus-Rohmer, D., H. Schatton, and T. Bauernhansl. 2016. 

Ecosystems, Strategy and Business Models in the age of 
Digitization - How the Manufacturing Industry is Going to 
Change its Logic. Procedia CIRP 57:8-13.

59.  Clarysse, B., M. Wright, J. Bruneel, and A. Mahajan. 

2014. Creating value in ecosystems: Crossing the chasm 
between knowledge and business ecosystems. Research 
Policy 43(7):1164-1176.

60.  Tsujimoto, M., Y. Kajikawa, J. Tomita, and Y. Matsumoto. 
2018. A review of the ecosystem concept — Towards 
coherent ecosystem design. Technological Forecasting 
and Social Change 136:49-58.

61.  Moore, J. 1993. Predators and Prey: A New Ecology of 

Competition. Harvard Business Review (May-June Issue). 
United States.

62.  AIHW. 2017. Health expenditure australia. Australian 

Government - Institute of Health and Welfare. Canberra, 
Australia.

63.  CSIRO. 2018. Future of Health: Shifting Australia’s 

focus from illness treatment to health and wellbeing 
management. CSIRO. Australia.

64.  AIHW. 2018. Waiting times for emergency department 

and elective surgery on the risse. Australian Government 
Institute of Health and Welfare. Canberra.

65.  Banger, M. 2019. Residential aged care wait time increases 

(22 January). The Australian Newspaper. Sydney.

66.  AIHW. 2018. Australia’s health 2018 - rural and remote 

population. Australian Government - Institute of Health 
and Welfare. 

67.  AIHW. 2017. Rural and remote health. Australian 

Government Institute of Health and Welfare. Canberra.

68.  Department of Health. 218. Ageing and aged care. 
Australian Government Department of Health. 

69.  AIHW. 2018. Australia’s health 2018: in brief. Australian 

Institute of Health and Welfare. 

70.  Alpha Beta. 2018. Digital Innovation - Australia’s $315b 

Opportunity. AlphaBeta. Sydney.

71.  AIHW. 2018. Australia’s health 2018 in brief. Australian 

Government - Australian Institute of Health and Welfare. 
Canberra.

72.  AIHW. 2018. Deaths in Australia. Australian Government - 

Institute of Health and Welfare. 

73.  Ong, J.M. and L. da Cruz. 2012. The bionic eye: a review. 
Clinical & Experimental Ophthalmology 40(1):6-17.

74. 

Johnston, M. 2018. Melbourne uni to lead medical AI 
research centre (10 October). IT News. Australia.

75.  Deakin University. 2018. Applied Artificial Intelligence 

Institute. Deakin University. 

76.  Monash University. 2018. Multi Modal Medical AI. Monash 

University. 

77.  Palmer-Derrien, S. 2018. Medical AI startup secures 

$1.1 million government grant, to develop Alzheimer’s 
diagnosis tool with CSIRO. SmartCompany. Australia.

78.  WHO. 2018. New Perspectives on Global Health Spending 
for Universal Health Coverage: Global report. World 
Health Organization. Geneva.

79.  GMI. 2018. Digital health market size to exceed $379bn by 

2024. Global Market Insights. 

80.  UN. 2017. The global guardian of public health. United 

Nations. New York.

81.  BITRE. 2019. Road deaths Australia: December 2018. 

Australian Government Bureau of Infrastructure Transport 
and Regional Economies. Canberra.

82.  AIHW. 2018. Injury – hospitalised injury due to land 

transport crashes. Australian Government Institute of 
Health and Welfare. Canberra.

83.  DIRDC. 2018. Road Safety. Australian Government 

Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development 
and Cities. Canberra, Australia.

84.  AAA. 2018. Road congestion in Australia. Australian 

Automobile Association (AAA). Canberra.

85.  BITRE. 2015. Traffic and congestion cost trends for 
Australian capital cities. Bureau of Infrastructure, 
Transport and Regional Economies, Australian 
Government, Canberra. Australian Government – 
Department of Infrastructure, Regional Development 
and Cities.

57

86.  Hubele, N. and K. Kennedy. 2018. Forward collision 
warning system impact. Traffic Injury Prevention:1-6.

www.austrade.gov.au/future-transport/case-studies/
cohda-wireless/). Canberra.

87.  Cicchino, J.B. 2017. Effectiveness of forward collision 

102.  SCATS. 2019. Why choose the Sydney Coordinated 

warning and autonomous emergency braking systems 
in reducing front-to-rear crash rates. Accident Analysis & 
Prevention 99(1):142-152.

88.  Patel, P. 2016. Pittsburgh’s AI traffic signals will make 

driving less boring. IEEE Spectrum. 

89.  Blowers, D. 2018. Energy policy failure behind 10 year 

story of spiralling electricity bills. ABC 

90.  Finkel, A. 2017. Independent review into the future 

security of the National Electricity Market. Chief Scientist. 

91.  Zia, T. 2017. Australia’s car industry needs cybersecurity 
rules to deal with the hacking threat. The Conversation. 

92.  Centre, A.C.S. 2017. 2017 threat report. Australian 

Government - Australian Cyber Security Centre. 

93.  Accenture Security. 2018. Gaining ground on the cyber 

attacker: 2018 state of cyber resilience. 

94.  ACIC. 2016. From state to federal to global crime issues. 

Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission. 

95.  Terrill, M. 2018. Cost overruns in transport infrastructure.

96.  PC. 2014. Public Infrastructure Inquiry (Report Number 

71) Volumes 1 and 2. Australian Government Productivity 
Commission. Canberra.

97.  Bowditch, G. 2017. Re-establishing Australia’s global 

infrastructure leadership. University of Sydney. Sydney, 
Australia.

98.  ATIC. 2018. Connected and Automated Vehicles. 

Australian Trade and Investment Commission, Australian 
Government. Canberra.

99.  Smith, J. 2018. Australia moves another step closer to 

driverless vehicles. Telstra Exchange. Sydney.

100.  Cohda. 2019. Cohda chosen for new US connected car 
trial. Cohda Wireless Website (cohdawireless.com) 
Accessed on 17 April 2019. Adelaide.

101.  Austrade. 2019. Case Study - Cohda Wireless beats GPS 
blackspots in New York City. Austrade Website (https://

Adaptive Traffic System? Sydney Coordinated Adaptive 
Traffic System Company Website and NSW Government 
Department of Transport Roads and Maratime Services. 
Sydney.

103.  Arash Jalalian, S.C., Michael Ostwald. 2014. Simulating 
pedestrian flow dynamics for evaluating the design of 
urban and architectural space. University of Newcastle. 

104.  PSMA. 2017. Annual Report. PSMA Australia. Canberra.

105.  Carmody, J. 2017. Uber-style driverless cars set for Perth 
as part of international trial (29 November). ABC News. 
Sydney.

106.  Rio Tinto. 2018. How did the world’s biggest robot end up 

here? Rio Tinto Website. Sydney.

107.  CSIRO. 2016. Hovermap. CSIRO Website. Canberra.

108.  FAO. 2017. The future of food and agriculture - trends and 
challenges. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the 
United Nations. 

109.  Roberts, A. 2014. Predicting the future of global water 
stress. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Boston.

110.  EIA. 2016. EIA projects 48% increase in world energy 
consumption by 2040. US Energy Information 
Administration. 

111.  UN. 2018. World Urbanisation Prospects. United Nations 

Development Program. New York, United States.

112.  DFAT. 2017. Foreign policy white paper. Australian 

Government, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 
Canberra, Australia.

113.  Heathcote, C. 2017. Forecasting infrastructure investment 
needs for 50 countries, 7 sectors through 2040. The 
World Bank. Washington DC.

114.  FS. 2018. Global Autonomous Driving Market Outlook. 

Frost and Sullivan. San Antonio, Texas, the United States.

115.  Vidot, A. 2017. Farmers getting older as latest survey 

reveals average age is 56 (7 July). ABC Rural News. Sydney.

116.  ABS. 2017. Australian Industry Catalogue Number 8155.0. 

Australian Bureau of Statistics. Canberra.

58 

Artificial Intelligence

117.  ABARES. 2017. Productivity matters for farm profit 

129.  Hall, D., F. Dayoub, T. Perez, and C. McCool. 2018. A rapidly 

(ABARES website). Australian Government Department of 
Agriculture and Water Resources. Canberra.

118.  Doyle, K. 2019. BOM declares 2018 Australia’s third-hottest 

year on record (10 Jan). ABC News. Sydney.

119.  Owen, M., C. Preston, and S. Walker. 2013. Resistance 

Rising Across Australia. GroundCover 104(1).

120.  DIIS. 2018. Resources 2030 Taskforce Australian resources 
- providing prosperity for future generations. Department 
of Industry, Innovation and Science, Australian 
Government. Canberra.

121.  Prior, T., D. Giurco, G. Mudd, L. Mason, and J. Behrisch. 
2012. Resource depletion, peak minerals and the 
implications for sustainable resource management. Global 
Environmental Change 22(3):577-587.

122.  Schodde, R. 2017. Long term trends in global exploration 
– are we finding enough metal? 11th Fennoscandian 
Exploration and Mining Conference 31st October, Levi, 
Finland. MinEx Consulting. Australia.

deployable classification system using visual data for the 
application of precision weed management. Computers 
and Electronics in Agriculture 148:107-120.

130.  ACFR. 2019. Australian Centre for Field Robotics (Website 
Accessed 1 Feb 2019). University of Sydney. Sydney, 
Australia.

131.  Gray, D. 2019. No one behind the wheel: The new 

workforce driving Australia’s mines. Sydney Morning 
Herald (27 April). Sydney.

132.  RioTinto. 2019. Mine of the future. Rio Tinto (Company 

Website Accessed on 13 Sept 2019). Australia.

133.  Kray, H. 2015. Farming for the future: The environmental 
sustainabililty of agriculture in a changing world. World 
Bank Group. Washington, United States.

134.  Austmine. 2019. Austmine company website accessed 1 

Feb 2019. Austmine. Woolloomooloo, New South Wales, 
Australia.

135.  Hao, F. 2018. China releases 2020 action plan for air 

123.  Rodriguez-Galiano, V., M. Sanchez-Castillo, M. Chica-

pollution (6 July). China Dialogue. China.

Olmo, and M. Chica-Rivas. 2015. Machine learning 
predictive models for mineral prospectivity: An evaluation 
of neural networks, random forest, regression trees and 
support vector machines. Ore Geology Reviews 71:804-
818.

124.  SWA. 2016. Fatality statistics by industry. Safe Work 

Australia. Canberra.

125.  Sydney Environmental Institute. 2018. Australia’s 

biodiversity and climate change. University of Sydney. 
Sydney, Australia.

126.  State of the Environment. 2016. Regional and landscape-
scale pressures: Land clearing. Commonwealth of 
Australia. Canberra, Australia.

127.  AIMS. 2018. Long-term Reef Monitoring Program - Annual 
Summary Report on coral reef condition for 2017/18. 
Australian Institute of Marine Science. Townsville.

128.  Bogue, R. 2016. Robots poised to revolutionise agriculture. 
Industrial Robot: the international journal of robotics 
research and application 43(5):450-456.

136.  Deloitte. 2018. The future of work: Occupational and 

education trends in data science in Australia. Deloitte. 
Sydney.

137.  Watts, T.W., G.J. Duncan, R.S. Siegler, and P.E. Davis-Kean. 
2014. What’s Past Is Prologue: Relations Between Early 
Mathematics Knowledge and High School Achievement. 
Educational Researcher 43(7):352-360.

138.  Ritchie, S.J. and T.C. Bates. 2013. Enduring Links From 
Childhood Mathematics and Reading Achievement to 
Adult Socioeconomic Status. Psychological Science 
24(7):1301-1308.

139.  ACER. 2019. The Programme for International Student 

Assessment (PISA): Australia versus the world. Australian 
Council for Educational Research (Website Accessed 13 
August 2019). Sydney.

140.  WEF. 2018. The future of jobs report. World Economic 

Forum. Geneva.

59

141.  AlphaBeta. 2019. Future Skills - To adapt to the future of 
work, Australians will undertake a third more education 
and training and change what, when and how we learn. 
Prepared by AlphaBeta for Google Australia. Sydney.

142.  Deming, D. 2017. The Growing Importance of Social Skills 
in the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 
132(4):1593-1640.

143.  Börner, K., O. Scrivner, M. Gallant, S. Ma, X. Liu, K. 

Chewning, L. Wu, and J.A. Evans. 2018. Skill discrepancies 
between research, education, and jobs reveal the 
critical need to supply soft skills for the data economy. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 115(50):12630-12637.

144.  BBC. 2017. Google DeepMind NHS app test broke UK 

privacy law (3 July). British Broadcasting Corporation. 
United Kingdom.

145.  ICO. 2017. Royal Free - Google DeepMind trial failed 
to comply with data protection law. Information 
Commissioner’s Office. London.

146.  Dawson, D., E. Schleiger, J. Horton, J. McLaughlin, C. 

Robinson, G. Quezada, J. Scowcroft, and S. Hajkowicz. 
2019. Artificial Intelligence: Australia’s Ethics Framework. 
Data61 CSIRO. Australia.

147.  AAA. 2018. American Trust in Autonomous Vehicles Slips. 

American Automobile Association. Orlando.

148.  Hengstler, M., E. Enkel, and S. Duelli. 2016. Applied 

artificial intelligence and trust—The case of autonomous 
vehicles and medical assistance devices. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change 105:105-120.

149.  OECD. 2018. OECD Statistics. Organisation for Economic 

Development and Cooperation. Paris.

150.  ABS. 2016. Research and Experimental Development, 

Businesses, Australia, 2015-16. Catalogue Number 8104 
Australian Bureau of Statistics. Canberra.

151.  PWC. 2018. The 2018 Global Innovation 1000 study: 

Investigating trends at the world’s 1000 largest corporate 
R&D spenders. PWC Strategy&. London.

60 

Artificial Intelligence

CSIRO Australia’s Innovation Catalyst

As Australia’s national science agency and 
innovation catalyst, CSIRO is solving the 
greatest challenges through innovative 
science and technology.

Unlocking a better future for everyone.

Contact us

1300 363 400 
+61 3 9545 2176 
csiroenquiries@csiro.au 
data61.csiro.au

For further information

Stefan Hajkowicz 
Senior Principal Scientist – Strategic Foresight 
Director – Data61 Insights Team 
stefan.hajkowicz@data61.csiro.au 
+61 7 3833 5540

B&M | 19-00346

