DEFENCE
WHITE PAPER

A Secure, Sovereign and
Prosperous Malaysia

DEFENCE
WHITE PAPER

A secure, sovereign and
prosperous Malaysia

First Published 2020
© Ministry of Defence (MINDEF)

All  rights  reserved.  No  part  of  this  book  may  be  reprinted  or  reproduced  or  utilised 
in  any  form,  or  by  electronic,  photopcopy,  mechanical,  recording  or  other  methods 
without permission in writing by the Secretary General, Ministry of Defence, 5th Floor,  
Wisma Pertahanan, Jalan Padang Tembak, 50634, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Telephone 
number: (60)3-2059 8400. 

Malaysia Nasional Library 

                         Cataloguing in Publication Data

Ministry of Defence
    Defence White Paper
    ISBN  978-967-16437-6-1
    1. Defence 2. White Paper I. Title

Printed by
ETM Prima Sdn. Bhd.
No. 133 & 135, Jalan SBC1
Taman Sri Batu Caves,
68100, Batu Caves, Selangor

 
                                                                                                      
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD BY THE PRIME MINISTER  

FOREWORD BY THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   

SECTION 1: VISION  

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION 
What is a Defence White Paper (DWP)? 
Why Malaysia’s First DWP? 
How does the DWP Serve the National Vision?   

CHAPTER 2: STRATEGIC OUTLOOK 
A Changing Security Environment   
Long-Term National Strategy   

SECTION 2: STRATEGY 

CHAPTER 3: DEFENCE STRATEGY  
National Defence Framework   
Fundamental Principles of Defence   
Pillars of National Defence Strategy  

CHAPTER 4: THE FUTURE FORCE  
Force Structure 
Capability Requirements 
Force Posture 
Catalyst for Developing the Future Force   

CHAPTER 5: PEOPLE IN DEFENCE 
Regular Forces 
Volunteer Forces   
The MAF Veterans 
Civil Servants in Defence 
Participation of and by the Rakyat 

1

2

4

10
11 
11
16

20
20
28

34
34 
39 
40

44
44
46
48
54

56
56
59
60
61
61

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

CHAPTER 6: INTERNATIONAL DEFENCE  
                         ENGAGEMENT
Goals of Credible Partnerships 
Scope and Levels of Defence Engagement   
Future Direction of Defence Engagement   

SECTION 3: IMPLEMENTATION

CHAPTER 7: DEFENCE SCIENCE,   
                         TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY
The Key Contributors of Defence Science,  

Technology and Industry 

The Government’s Support for the Defence 
Science, Technology and Industry 

Framework for the National Defence  
Industry Policy (NDIP)   

CHAPTER 8: TRANSFORMATION,   

      GOVERNANCE AND FUNDING

Defence Transformation 
Good Governance  
Funding 
Summary 

ABBREVIATIONS 

64 

64
64
74

78

79

79

80 

86

86
88
89
90

91

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

FOREWORD BY THE
PRIME MINISTER

I am pleased to introduce Malaysia’s first Defence White Paper (DWP). The purpose and objectives 
of  the  DWP  are  aimed  to  embody  the  Government  of  Malaysia’s  aspiration  in  strengthening  our 
national defence and formulating directions, as well as strategic priorities for the nation’s security.

As a statement of both intent and capability, this historical document takes into account the presence 
and position of the defence sector, within the whole-of-government frameworks to ensure that the 
DWP continues to be in harmony with the agenda and aspiration of the Government.

The DWP is a manifestation of a higher level of transparency in the government’s administration, 
its commitment to the principles of democracy and the importance of the whole-of-nation approach. 
The  development  process  illustrated  an  unprecedented  collaboration  effort  involving  multiple 
stakeholders cutting across government agencies, academics and think tanks, defence industry players, 
private sectors and non-governmental organisations.  

The  Government  views  defence  and  security  as  all-encompassing.    It  calls  for  a  wholesome  effort 
that  includes  the  involvement  from  the  society  at  large.    Apart  from  promoting  a  transparent 
administration  whilst  embracing  openness,  inclusivity  and  accountability,  the  DWP  concept  will 
ultimately form an integrated commitment for the society to equally assume responsibility to defend 
the nation.

Malaysia has notably profiled its presence in the regional and global arena of defence and security 
through  active  participation  under  the  auspices  of  the  United  Nations  since  1960,  and  as  one  of 
the founding states of ASEAN in 1967.  The DWP will function as yet another element which will 
enhance Malaysia’s geopolitical profile, within today’s global security and defence landscape.

This  White  Paper  recognises  the  consequential  role  of  economic  sustainability  in  providing  vital 
support  towards  an  integrated  defence  industry  sector.    It  also  presents  a  new  approach  to  the 
nation’s defence science, technology and industry sphere by acting as a catalyst for the nation’s defence 
ecosystem and economic growth.

I acknowledge the strategic significance of the DWP as a blueprint in the formulation of a national 
policy on defence and security, as well as the role of the Ministry of Defence as a transformative 
organisation. I am confident that each detail outlined in this White paper will be materialised through 
the  Government’s  concerted  efforts  to  embrace  the  national  aspirations  in  pursuing  the  vision  of 
Malaysia as a secure, sovereign and prosperous nation.

YAB TUN MAHATHIR MOHAMED
Prime Minister, Malaysia

01

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

FOREWORD BY THE
MINISTER OF DEFENCE

Alhamdulillah, the greatest gratitude to Allah as due to His benevolence, the Defence White Paper 
(DWP) has now been issued. 

Malaysia, located at the centre of Southeast Asia, is a maritime country, flanked by the South China 
Sea and Pacific Ocean on one side and the Straits of Malacca and Indian Ocean on the other.  

Malaysia is also a nation with continental roots connected to mainland Southeast Asia and Eurasia  
by  land.  This  unique  location  allows  Malaysia  to  assume  a  crucial  role  of  connecting  both  the 
Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions for shared prosperity. 

During these times of uncertainty, it is imperative that we take serious efforts to protect our national 
interests and defend our sovereignty as well as territorial integrity. 

Cognisant of this reality, the Ministry of Defence (MINDEF) has produced the DWP with the vision 
of “Malaysia is a secure, sovereign and prosperous nation.” 

The DWP details Malaysia’s plan to develop our Armed Forces into a force of the future comprising 
of  five  main  characteristics  which  are  jointness,  interoperability,  technology-based,  able  to  operate 
simultaneously in two theatres and mission-orientated. 

This defensive-postured force of the future will be integrated, agile and focused, as well as able to 
respond to all threats that Malaysia may have to face. This initiative will be further enhanced through 
robust participation of the Government together with the rakyat in ensuring the nation’s security, 
sovereignty and prosperity.

As a neutral and peace-loving nation that seeks to befriend all nations, Malaysia is committed to 
enhancing credible partnerships through inclusive international diplomatic initiatives. Through 
defence diplomacy, Malaysia and other countries that share the same aspirations can collaborate and 
combine our collective strengths and resources to achieve national security as well as regional and 
global stability. 

The Government is committed to reforming the defence sector and ensuring stable and sustainable 
funding so that our defence capabilities, planning and procurement are executed efficiently. 

God  willing,  all  the  plans  outlined  in  the  DWP  can  be  successfully  implemented  with  integrity, 
transparency and good governance. 

Finally,  I  would  like  to  record  my  sincere  appreciation  to  everyone  involved  in  the  drafting  and 
successful issuance of this DWP.

YB TUAN HAJI MOHAMAD BIN SABU
Minister of Defence, Malaysia

02

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Defence White Paper (DWP) represents the Government’s firm commitment to Malaysia’s 
defence and resilience to protect national interests, particularly to defend its sovereignty and 
territorial integrity. As Malaysia’s inaugural DWP, it details the Government’s stance on national 
defence, presents its outlook for strategic trends and outlines the National Defence Framework to 
pursue the vision of Malaysia as a secure, sovereign and prosperous nation.

This  DWP  underscores  three  key  messages:  (1)  do  not  take  the  national  security  for  granted; 
(2) the  Whole-of-Government and Whole-of-Society approaches are central to national defence; and 
(3) non-alignment and shared security are the basis of Malaysia’s Credible Partnerships.

The DWP is developed based on the National Security Policy, Malaysia’s main national security 
document. The DWP recognises the important roles played by the Ministry of Defence (MINDEF) and 
the Malaysian Armed Forces (MAF) in leading the nation’s defence, as well as the participation of other 
stakeholders and the rakyat, the Malaysian people, in the national defence ecosystem.

the  ends,  ways  and  means 

to  protect  Malaysia’s  national 

The DWP is structured into three parts: (1) Vision; (2) Strategy; and (3) Implementation. They 
cover 
first 
part, which consists of Introduction (Chapter 1) and Strategic Outlook (Chapter 2), sets the direction 
of  the  national  defence.  The  second  part  covers  Defence  Strategy  (Chapter  3),  The  Future 
Force (Chapter 4), People in Defence (Chapter 5) and International Defence Engagement (Chapter 6), 
and discusses methods and approaches to galvanise the internal and external resources available to 
Malaysia to pursue the three pillars of the National Defence Strategy. The third part, which comprises 
of  Defence  Science,  Technology  and  Industry  (Chapter  7)  and  Transformation,  Governance  and 
Funding (Chapter 8), details the Government’s initiatives to ensure the successful implementation 
of the DWP.

interests.  The 

Chapter 1 introduces the DWP by answering the questions: What is a Defence White Paper? Why is 
the Government issuing the DWP? and How will the DWP set forth the direction to pursue the national 
defence vision. The DWP serves three purposes: (1) engaging the rakyat and stakeholders; (2) evaluating 
the ever-changing security environment; and (3) exploring approaches to enhance Malaysia’s defence 
capability and preparedness. Malaysia’s geographical location in the middle of Southeast Asia with 
the Pacific Ocean and South China Sea on one side, and the Indian Ocean and Straits of Malacca on 
the other side, positions Malaysia as a maritime nation with continental roots, the bridging linchpin 
between the two ocean regions. 

Chapter 2 analyses the increasingly complex security environment at the global and regional levels. 
This uncertainty has presented both challenges and opportunities to the nation, the region and the 
international community. Malaysia is not beset by military conflict with other countries. However, 
the  nation  still  faces  three  main  security  challenges,  namely:  (1)  uncertain  big  power  relations; 
(2) complex Southeast Asian neighbourhood; and (3) increasing non-traditional security threats. 

Chapter 3 discusses  the  National  Defence  Strategy  based  on  the  National  Defence  Framework, 
divided  into  three  parts:  (1)  National  Defence  Vision;  (2)  National  Defence  Interests;  and  (3) 
National Defence Objectives. The National Defence Vision envisages Malaysia as a secure, sovereign 
and prosperous nation. This, in turn, defines Malaysia’s defence interests: (1) security; (2) sovereignty; 
and 
identifies  five  National  Defence  Objectives.  This 
chapter then introduces three Concentric Areas of Interests consisting of (1) Core Area; (2) Extended 

(3)  prosperity.  This  Framework 

04

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Area; and (3) Forward Area that contains national interests that have to be protected at all times. 
Subsequently, this chapter outlines the three pillars of the National Defence Strategy: (1) Concentric 
Deterrence; (2) Comprehensive Defence; and (3) Credible Partnerships. 

Chapter 4  explains  the  Government’s  plan  to  develop  the  Future  Force  to  pursue  the  strategy  of 
Concentric Deterrence. The Future Force adopts a defensive posture, in line with Malaysia’s position 
that is against the use of force to solve any dispute or conflict. The development of the Future Force 
is based on five characteristics: (1) Jointness; (2) Interoperability; (3) Technology-Based; (4) Able to 
Operate Simultaneously in Two Theatres; and (5) Mission-Orientated. It identifies ten capability 
requirements  to  transform  the  MAF  into  an  integrated,  agile  and  focused  force,  and  to 
effectively perform the tasks of Detect, Deter and Deny along the Concentric Areas.

Chapter 5 highlights the roles of of both the defence workforce and the rakyat in implementing the 
strategy of Comprehensive Defence. The defence workforce consists of the Regular Forces, Volunteer 
Forces, MAF Veterans and civil servants working in the defence and security sector. This chapter lists 
out the fundamentals that require attention and actions for each category of the defence workforce. It 
also discusses the participation of and by the rakyat in defending the country, in line with the concept 
of Pertahanan Menyeluruh (HANRUH). Instilling patriotism and security culture among the people is 
emphasised to ensure their active participation in the national defence ecosystem. 

Chapter  6  focuses  on  international  defence  relations  in  pursuing  the  strategy  of  Credible 
Partnerships.  It  describes  Malaysia’s  engagements  with  neighbouring  countries,  as  well  as 
countries  of  interest  at  the  bilateral  and  multilateral  levels.  The  Credible  Partnerships  are  vital  to 
achieve five defence relations goals: (1) Shaping Malaysia’s defence relations with other countries; (2) 
Managing shared security challenges; (3) Fostering regional stability in accordance with international 
laws, conventions, rules and norms;  (4) Enhancing the MAF’s capabilities and defence readiness; and 
(5) Promoting Malaysia’s position and interests in the international arena. This chapter also sets 
forth the directions for Malaysia’s future defence engagements.  

Chapter  7  discusses  the  role  of  defence  science,  technology  and  industry  as  a  catalyst  for 
enhancing  the  nation’s  defence  ecosystem  and  economic  growth.  It  identifies  three  core 
initiatives: (1) Stimulating research and development; (2) Encouraging economic spillover 
contributions to the nation; and (3) Fulfilling the nation’s defence needs. This chapter puts forward the 
framework for the National Defence Industry Policy (NDIP) that sets the direction based on five key 
thrusts: (1) Human Capital Development; (2) Technology Development; (3) Industrial Development;  
(4) Towards Self-reliance; and (5) Penetrating the Global Market.

Chapter  8  identifies  three  building  blocks  for  the  implementation  of  the  DWP:  (1)  Pursuing 
defence  transformation;  (2)  Institutionalising  good  governance;  and  (3)  Securing  stable  defence 
funding.  A  National  Defence  Investment  Plan  (Pelan  Pelaburan  Pertahanan  Negara,  3PN)  will  be 
developed to register the requirements and steps to be taken to implement defence transformation. To 
oversee the implementation of the DWP and ensure good governance, the Government will establish: 
(1)  Defence  Investment Committee chaired by the Prime Minister; (2) Policy Committee chaired 
by the Minister of Defence; and (3) Defence Transformation Committee co-chaired by the Secretary 
General of MINDEF and Chief of Defence Forces. The expected outcome includes structured defence 
fundings for the development of the Future Force and expansion of the local defence industry, all 
of which aims to maximise legitimacy, acceptability and reliability.

05

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER STRUCTURE

N
O
I
S
I
V

Y
G
E
T
A
R
T
S

N
O

I
T
A
T
N
E
M
E
L
P
M

I

INTRODUCTION

1

2

STRATEGIC OUTLOOK

DEFENCE STRATEGY

THE FUTURE
FORCE

PEOPLE IN 
DEFENCE

INTERNATIONAL
DEFENCE ENGAGEMENT

7

8

DEFENCE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY 
AND INDUSTRY

REFORMS, GOVERNANCE AND FUNDING

06

SECTION 1
VISION

CHAPTER 1

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

INTRODUCTION

1.

2.

3.

This  Defence  White  Paper  (DWP),  the  first  by  Malaysia,  embodies  the  Government’s 
firm commitment to strengthen national defence. It presents the Government’s strategic 
outlook  for  the  coming  decade,  sets  forth  the  direction  for  the  defence  sector  and 
formulates a long-term strategy for defending national sovereignty and territorial integrity 
from all forms of external threats and security challenges.

As  a  Government  paper,  this  DWP  outlines  a  national  defence  framework  to  safeguard 
Malaysia’s interests.  It recognises the important role played by the Ministry of Defence 
(MINDEF), the Malaysian Armed Forces (MAF) and other relevant agencies, in ensuring 
Malaysia is secure, sovereign and prosperous.

The  MAF,  with  the  Yang  di-Pertuan  Agong  (the  King)  as  its  Supreme  Commander  as 
enshrined under Article 41 of the Federal Constitution, serves as the nation’s protective 
shield. The Armed Forces Act 1972 governs the roles and functions of its three Services, i.e. 
the Malaysian Army, the Royal Malaysian Navy (RMN) and the Royal Malaysian Air Force 
(RMAF), alongside the Volunteer Forces.

NINTH SCHEDULE [Articles 74, 77] FEDERAL CONSTITUTION
Legislative Lists
List 1 - Federal List
“2. Defence of  the Federation or any part thereof, including -”

naval, military
 and air forces and 
other armed forces;

any armed forces attached to or
operating with any of the armed forces 
 of the Federation; visiting forces;

defence works; military and protected areas; 
naval, military and air 
force bases; barracks
aerodromes and other works;

manoeuvres;

war and peace; alien enemies and enemy aliens; enemy property; 
trading with an enemy; war damage; war risk insurance;

arms, fire-arms,
ammunition 
and explosives;

national service;
and

civil
defence.

4.

The  DWP  aligns  defence  policy  with  the  Government’s  national  security  policy,  foreign 
policy and other related policies in accordance with the whole-of-government approach. This 
inaugural  DWP  presents  a  Malaysian  national  defence  vision,  which  balances  the  near  and
long-term  national  interests,  strategic  needs  and  fiscal  considerations.  It  affirms  the 
Government’s  commitment  to  invest  in  Malaysia’s  defence  capabilities  and  resilience  in  a 
sustainable manner.

10

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

This introductory chapter provides an overview of what a DWP is, why the Government is 
issuing the country’s first DWP and how the direction set forth in the DWP will strengthen the 
nation’s defence and security. It presents a vision to advance Malaysia’s current interests 
and future aspirations as a maritime nation with continental roots, exploring the nation’s 
unique role as a bridging linchpin between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions.   

What is a Defence White Paper (DWP)?

A Defence White Paper is a government document about the country’s strategic direction and 
defence planning. It is different from classified defence policy papers in that a DWP is an open 
document accessible by the public, with no confidential material. Both documents present a 
country’s security assessment, defence posture and military capability development, but with 
different purposes and emphasis.

As a public document, this DWP conveys a key message to all Malaysians that security should 
not  be  taken  for  granted.  While  the  Government  is  determined  to  pursue  Malaysia’s  right 
to defend its national sovereignty and other interests, this pursuit is constantly subject to the 
multifaceted  risks,  threats  and  uncertainties  stemming  from  the  ever-evolving  security 
environment.  For  these  realities,  MINDEF  and  the  MAF  have  constantly  collaborated  with 
other government agencies at home, as well as with external partners, to address challenges at 
multiple levels. This DWP emphasises national security is the responsibility of ALL in the 
government  and  ALL  in  the  society,  including  the  people,  whose  awareness  and 
participation form the backbone of national resilience. These are all crucial matters, because 
internal resilience and external partnerships are, respectively, the foundation and the extended 
line of defence for Malaysia’s security. 

Why Malaysia’s First DWP?

The  DWP  serves  three  purposes:  (1)  engaging  the  public  and  relevant  stakeholders; 
(2)  evaluating  the  ever-changing  strategic  environment;  as  well  as  (3)  exploring  approaches 
towards enhancing Malaysia’s defence capability and readiness.

Engaging  the  public  and  relevant  stakeholders.  National  defence  is  a  process 
requiring the active participation of and by the people. The Government is committed to 
engaging the public on defence and other related matters. This DWP offers an opportunity to 
reach out and inform the rakyat, comprising of individual citizens, groups, as well as all 
stakeholders in and out of the public sector, about the Government’s present priorities and 
future plans for bolstering Malaysia’s defence.

For this purpose, the DWP describes the sources of security risks, the Government’s plan to 
develop a more integrated, agile and focused force, as well as the roles and responsibilities of all 
Malaysians in national defence. It also emphasises the Government’s commitment to a more 
regular cycle of defence policy updates. 

Each of these efforts is a manifestation of democratic values and practices of good governance 
through integrity, transparency and accountability. By enhancing the peoples’ understanding 
of the roles of the defence force and why these roles are important to them, the DWP helps to 
build public support for the MAF, and assists them in understanding the need for sustainable 
defence funding.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

11

 
 
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

This is important not only for democratic procedural reasons, but also because it helps to 
consolidate the societal base of national security. The MAF needs the support of the rakyat to 
win any armed conflict either internal or external as proven during the First and Second 
Emergency (1948-1960 and 1968-1989 respectively) and the Konfrontasi (1963-1966).

Engaging  the  rakyat  and  all  stakeholders  is  a  component  of  Total  Defence  or  Pertahanan 
Menyeluruh (HANRUH), where everybody plays a role in defending the nation. Introduced in 
1986, HANRUH is an approach that emphasises the involvement of every level of society, 
government agencies, private sector, non-governmental organizations and the people in 
national  defence  and  security.  Educating  the  rakyat  about  the  emerging  security  issues  is  an 
essential move to involve them to do their part to defend Malaysia.

Engaging  the  rakyat  in  defence  and  security  issues  provides  a  better  understanding  of  the 
responsibilities  of  the  Minister  of  Defence,  Secretary  General  (Sec-Gen)  of  MINDEF  and 
the Chief of Defence Force (CDF), as well as the roles and contributions of the MAF.

to 

ensure 

strategic 

guidance 

and  provides 

The Minister of Defence advises the Prime Minister, the Cabinet and the Parliament on defence
matters 
effective 
implementation  of  MINDEF’s  policies.  The  Sec-Gen  serves  as  the  Chief  Executive  of  the 
Ministry, Controlling Officer and the Ministry’s Chief of Public Accounts as well as the main 
advisor to the Minister. The Sec-Gen is the primary lead in formulating the Ministry’s policies 
and development plans to achieve MINDEF’s objectives and policy goals. On the other hand, 
the CDF is the Minister’s most senior advisor on military affairs under the ambit of defence. 
The CDF, together with the three Service Chiefs advise the Armed Forces Council which is 
responsible for the MAF’s command, disciplinary actions, administration and related matters, 
except  on  the  operational  use  of  the  armed  forces.  The  CDF  is  responsible  for  ensuring 
the implementation of the decisions by the Council. 

successful 

and 

The primary role of  the MAF is to maintain peace and be prepared for any armed conflict, 
in  order  to  effectively  defend  Malaysia’s  sovereignty,  territorial  integrity  and  other  national 
interests  against  external  threats.  The  Latin  proverb  “Si vis pacem, para  bellum”  means  “If  you 
want peace, prepare for war”. Thus, defence preparedness is the best guarantee for peace. As 
a peace-loving and compassionate nation, Malaysia places greater emphasis on diplomacy in 
dealing  with  other  countries.  MINDEF  and  the  MAF  have  actively  conducted  defence 
diplomacy  and  other  international  engagement  activities  with  regional  and  global  partners. 
The MAF has participated in a number of the United Nations (UN) Peacekeeping Operations 
(PKOs) around the world and has also assisted civil authorities in addressing security challenges 
whilst supporting nation building.

The National Defence Policy (NDP) is a classified document produced by the Government 
prior to the DWP in 1971, 1979 and 1981.  In 1986, a comprehensive NDP was produced and 
had undergone revisions in 1993 and 2006.  In 2010, an open version of the NDP was 
published in line with the spirit of HANRUH.

This  DWP  builds  upon  the  engagement  efforts  with  key  stakeholders.  The  main 
reference  is  the  National  Security  Policy  (NSP)  by  the  National  Security  Council  (NSC) 
published  in  2017.  The  NSP  serves  as  an  overarching  capstone  document  for  all 
subsequent security-related agencies and policies, including this DWP, alongside the parallel 
documents, such as the Foreign Policy Framework of the New Malaysia: Change in Continuity 
produced by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and the Security and Public Order Policy (Dasar 
Keselamatan dan Ketenteraman Awam, DKKA) produced by the Ministry of Home Affairs in 2019. 
These key documents represent the Government’s  emphasis  on  inter-agency  coordination 
among the constituent components of Malaysia’s security cluster.

12

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Evaluating  the  ever-changing  strategic  environment.  The  current  and  ongoing 
changes  at  the  global  and  regional  levels  call  for  a  new  round  of  strategic 
reassessment. Chapter 2: Strategic Outlook performs this task.

A continuous assessment of external conditions is crucial, as change is a constant reality in the 
international  security  ecosystem.  Geographical  circumstances,  complex  neighbourhood  and 
relative  military  capabilities  all  have  direct  and  indirect  bearings  on  Malaysia’s  national 
interests.

Geography  is  destiny.  As  a  relatively  small  nation  with  two  territories:  Peninsular 
Malaysia,  and  Sabah  and  Sarawak,  between  the  vast  Pacific  and  Indian  Oceans, 
Malaysia’s  strategic  location  and  natural  resources  have  been  both  a  blessing  and  a 
challenge.  

Indeed, Malaysia’s history is, in many ways, a history of big power politics. It is a history 
of how the big powers of the day impacted the fate and fortune of the country. While bringing 
about  opportunities  for  commercial  and  civilisational  development,  geography  also  drew 
unsolicited  attention  and  exploitation  from  powerful  actors  for  domination  in  the  Malay 
Archipelago. 

This recurring theme is well illustrated by the country’s historical timeline: the rise and fall of 
the Malacca Sultanate, the successive colonial rule by the Portuguese (1511-1641), the Dutch 
(1641-1795,  1818-1825)  and  then  the  British  (1795-1818,  1826-1957),  the  changing  shape  of 
colonial Malaya after the 1824 Anglo-Dutch Treaty, the Japanese occupation (December 1941-
August  1945),  the  birth  of  the  Federation  of  Malaya  as  a  sovereign  state  (31  August  1957), 
followed by the creation of a larger federation when Malaya (Tanah Melayu) merged with other 
former  British  colonies  of  Singapore,  Sabah  and  Sarawak  formed  an  independent  Malaysia 
(16 September 1963) at the height of the Cold War.

While different big powers have come and gone, the geopolitical challenges of the country 
remain.  Although  the  present-day  Malaysia  is  not  directly  threatened  by  any  militarily 
stronger powers the same way as its predecessor polities experienced during the age of European 
colonisation and World War II, its interests have continued to be affected by the actions and 
interactions of the big powers of the contemporary era.  

As a country with two separate territories, Malaysia currently faces not only the challenges 
of  big  power  politics,  but  also  a  range  of  non-traditional  security  threats,  as  elaborated  in
Chapter 2: Strategic Outlook.

Due  to  the  nation’s  relative  limitations  in  size  and  capacity,  the  Government  has 
recognised  the  need  to  be  proactive  and  pragmatic  in  coping  with  strategic  risks.  
Continuous assessment of the security environment is a central part of this process. 

The  Government’s  assessment  on  the  security  environment  had  at  times  resulted  in 
adjustments  or  changes  in  its  strategic  planning.  A  reassessment  in  the  1980s  had  led 
to  the  transformation  of  the  MAF  from  a  counter-insurgency  force  to  a  more 
conventional  one.  It  also  contributed  to  a  shift  from  a  threat-based  to  a  capability-based 
defence  policy.  A  more  recent  evaluation  has  further  recalibrated  the  policy 
into  an 
in  Chapter  3:  Defence 
Strategy and Chapter 4: Future Force.

interest-based  approach.  This 

is  elaborated 

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

13

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

The  reassessment  of  changing  realities  at  the  international  level  has  occasionally
resulted  in  Malaysia  changing  the  forms  of  its  defence  engagement.  Malaysia  used 
to  anchor  on  a  military  alliance,  the  Anglo-Malayan/Malaysian  Defence  Agreement 
(AMDA)  with  the  United  Kingdom.  The  alliance-centric  approach  was  later  replaced  by 
a  more  balanced  external  posture,  when  AMDA  was  succeeded  by  the  Five  Power 
Defence  Arrangements  (FPDA)  in  1971.  It  was  around  the  same  time  that 
Malaysia  started  to  embrace  non-alignment  and  the  Association  of  Southeast  Asian 
Nation  (ASEAN)  regionalism  in  its  external  outlook.  The  Zone  of  Peace, 
Freedom  and  Neutrality  (ZOPFAN)  declaration  was  signed  by  Foreign  Ministers  of  the 
ASEAN  member 
in  Kuala  Lumpur.  The  creation  of  various 
ASEAN-led  mechanisms  since  the  1990s  has  deepened  the  role  of  ASEAN  as  the 
cornerstone of Malaysia’s foreign policy.

in  1971 

states 

through 

Parallel  to  these  changing  external  postures  is  the  changing  foundations  of  Malaysia’s 
internal  resilience.  “Resilience”  means  a  nation’s  overall  capacity  to  withstand 
challenges 
inter-agency  coordination,  as  well  as  national  capability  and 
cohesion  across  the  society  to  tackle  national  problems.  It  encompasses  national 
unity,  government  coherence,  development  and  societal  participation 
in  security 
preparedness.  From  a  Malaysian  perspective,  defence  and  development  always  go 
hand-in-hand,  as  stressed  by  KESBAN  (Keselamatan  dan  Pembangunan,  or  “Security  and 
Development”), a concept adopted during the Second Emergency.

The whole-of-government and the whole-of-society approaches are the key pathways to enhance 
Malaysia’s  national  resilience.  The  Government’s  approach  to  resilience  is  highlighted  in 
Chapter  5:  People  in  Defence.  Efforts  to  build  internal  resilience  go  in  tandem  with  the 
endeavour  to  forge  external  partnerships,  the  focus  of  Chapter  6:  International  Defence 
Engagement. Together, they form the foundation of Malaysia’s pursuit of security.

Enhancing Malaysia’s defence capability and readiness. The third and the most important 
purpose of the DWP is to identify ways and means to enhance the country’s defence capability 
and military preparedness. This task is performed by Chapters 3 to 8, on the basis of the vision 
and strategic outlook analysis presented in Chapters 1 and 2. 

Chapter 3: Defence Strategy translates the vision into directions by describing the three pillars 
of Malaysia’s defence strategy as a roadmap to enhancing Malaysia’s defence readiness. These 
pillars  are:  Concentric  Deterrence,  Comprehensive  Defence  and  Credible  Partnerships. 
Each of the pillars is elaborated in Chapters 4, 5 and 6, respectively.

Chapter  7:  Defence  Science,  Technology  and  Industry  and  Chapter  8:  Transformation, 
Governance  and  Funding  concentrate  on  the  implementation  of  the  DWP.  Both 
chapters  explain  how  the  Government  plans  to  operationalise  the  three  pillars  into 
enhanced  national  defence  by  consolidating  the  defence  capability  development  plan, 
pursuing defence transformations, reinvigorating Malaysia’s defence industry as an economic 
catalyst  and  securing  a  stable  defence  funding.  All  of  these  are  aimed  at  transforming 
the MAF into an integrated, agile and focused force.

It  is  important  to  understand  the  development  of  the  MAF  and  related  agencies  as 
the  nation’s  security  custodian.  When  Malaya  attained  independence  from  the  British 
on  31  August  1957,  the  then  Malayan  Armed  Forces  consisted  of  an  Army  and  a  Navy 
that  were  24  and  23  years  old  respectively.  The  Malayan  Army,  which  included 
the  Malay  Regiment,  the  Federation  Regiment  and  the  Federation  Armoured  Car 

14

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

counter-insurgency 
equipped 
Squadron,  was  developed 
operations  against  the  Malayan  Communist  Party  (MCP).  The  Royal  Malayan 
Navy  was  then  still  a  rudimentary  naval  force.  The  Royal  Federation  Air  Force  was 
created on 2 June 1958, after independence.

carry  out 

and 

to 

35.

36.

37.

Following  the  formation  of  the  Federation  of  Malaysia  on  16  September  1963  when 
Malaya  merged  with  Sabah,  Sarawak  and  Singapore  (Singapore  separated  from  the 
Federation  in  August  1965),  the  Malayan  Armed  Forces  became  the  Malaysian  Armed 
Forces.  Given  the  nature  of  threats  posed  by  the  insurgency  and  Konfrontasi,  the 
development  of  the  MAF  in  the  earliest  decades  was  focused  largely  on  land-based 
operations. 

in  several  key 
The  MAF’s  capability  development  efforts  are  well  articulated 
documents,  primarily  the  Malaysian  Armed  Forces  (MAF)’s  Capability  Development  Plan 
known as the Fourth Dimension Malaysian Armed Forces, 4D MAF.

Over  the  subsequent  decades,  each  of  the  three  Services  of  the  MAF  has  grown  in  size 
and  functions.  Each  has  continuously  sought  to  enhance  its  defence  capacity  through 
effective  use  of  land,  sea  and  air  power.  Efforts  to  develop  a  Joint  Forces  Command 
(JFC)  started  when  the  Malaysian  Armed  Forces  Headquarters  (MAF  HQ)  was 
established  in  1992.  The  Joint  Forces  Headquarters  (JFHQ)  was  eventually  launched  in 
2004,  thereby  institutionalising  the  jointness  concept  where  the  three  Services  jointly 
perform  functions  in  terms  of  governance  and  operational  control.  The  JFHQ  is 
entrusted  with  all  the  joint  exercises,  joint  and  combined  operations  as  well  as 
multinational operations.

15

   
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

38.

39.

40.

At  the  Service  level,  there  is  a  series  of  documents  aimed  at  transforming  the 
respective  Services  and  enhancing  their  defence  capability,  in  ways  that  align  their 
resources  with  the  country’s  strategic  interests.  These  documents  are:  (1)  the  Army  for 
the  Next  Generation  (Army  4nextG)  Strategic  Development  Plan  that  envisages  thrusts 
to  enhance  the  Army’s  capability  towards  2050;  (2)  the  RMN  #15to5  Transformation 
Programme,  serving  as  a  blueprint  to  turn  the  Navy  into  “a  balanced,  credible 
and  versatile  armada”  by  2050;  and  (3)  the  RMAF  Capability  Development  Plan  2055 
(CAP55) detailing its modernisation plan up to 2055. 

Developing  upon  existing  Government  documents,  this  DWP  presents  a  transformative 
strategy  aimed  at  enhancing  Malaysia’s  overall  defence  capability  in  a  coherent  way. 
This  long-term  blueprint  seeks  to  translate  the  elements  of  national  power  into  national 
strengths,  which  are  robust  enough  to  deter  potential  threats  (along  the  concentric  areas 
of the core, extended and forward areas), comprehensive enough to continuously build resilience 
at home, as well as credible enough to attract and expand circles of partnerships abroad.

How Does the DWP Serve the National Vision?

The  DWP  serves  Malaysia’s  national  vision  in  several  ways.  For  the  immediate  and 
medium  terms,  it  enables  the  Government  to  pursue  three  desired  outcomes,  namely: 
legitimacy,  acceptability  and  reliability.  For  the  longer  term,  the  DWP  strengthens 
Malaysia’s  position  as  a  maritime  nation  with  continental  roots,  and  maximises  its 
potentials as a bridging linchpin between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. 

16

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

Legitimacy is about government authority, a central element in internal resilience. The DWP, 
having  been  deliberated  and  prepared  after  extensive  consultation  across  civil-military  lines 
with considerable input from academics, think-tanks, industry representatives, civil society 
organisations, all components of the government and private sector, reflects a broad spectrum 
of viewpoints about Malaysian defence including the required functions of the armed forces. 
Inclusively  engaging  the  public  and  a  wide  range  of  stakeholders  in  the  policy-making 
process is a fundamental exercise in democracy. It confers a great procedural legitimacy on 
the DWP and related policies.

Acceptability,  the  second  desired  outcome,  is  about  policy  agreeability  among 
governmental  agencies,  in  line  with  the  whole-of-government  approach.  This  DWP  seeks  to 
increase  the  acceptability  of  its  vision  across  all  government  agencies,  chiefly  by  forging 
a shared outlook on external threats and opportunities, and the need to view each other as 
indispensable  partners.  The  higher  the  acceptability,  the  higher  the  governance  cohesion 
and the higher the internal resilience. Reaching consensus and continuous maximisation of 
inter-agency coordination are desired outcomes of this DWP.

the  DWP 

is  about  enhancing 
Another  desired  outcome  of 
military  readiness  and  optimal  operational  ability  of  the  MAF  in  tackling  security 
challenges  effectively.  The  DWP  provides  the  directions  for  the  MAF  to  be  transformed 
into an integrated, agile and focused force. A reliable defence force is expected to effectively 
protect national interests, avoiding conflict when we can, and winning the war when we 
must.

is  reliability.  It 

These desired outcomes reflect the prime audience of the DWP. Legitimacy is for the hearts 
of  Malaysian  people,  acceptability  for  the  relevant  agencies  and  the  reliability  of  the  MAF 
for external partners.

All the three outcomes are vital. They lay the foundation for Malaysia to turn the nation’s 
democratic dividends into a transformative, inclusive vision of serving a bridging linchpin 
role between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. The vision leverages on Malaysia’s 
geography, diversity and democracy for punching above its weight at the international level.

This vision is supported by Malaysia’s long-time diplomatic activism, defence approach and 
developmental  aspirations.  It  is  also  anchored  on  the  Government’s  commitment  to 
contribute to ASEAN centrality, regional stability and global development, including 
realising  the  UN  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs)  and  aligning  them  with  regional 
agenda  such  as  the  ASEAN  Community  Vision  2025  and  ASEAN  Outlook  on  the 
Indo- Pacific.

47.

Malaysia’s vision as the bridging linchpin between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions 
connects the nation’s past, present and future, as follows:

i. 

Past. The Malacca Sultanate, the Malay dynasty that ruled the Malacca entrepôt and 
commanded the major sea route between India and China, was a preeminent trading 
centre in Southeast Asia during the 15th century. It was the emporium of the East. 
Leveraging on its geographical-halfway along the main international shipping 
route, Malacca established itself as a prosperous trading port by attracting merchants 
from Arabia, Africa, Persia, Europe, India and China. It was a centre of civilisational 
exchange and religious learning, spreading Islam to other communities in the Malay 
Archipelago. Its geographical location, however, attracted major powers to Malacca, 
making  it  the  first  destination  for  colonisation  by  Western  powers  in  Southeast 
Asia when the Portuguese invaded the Sultanate in 1511.

17

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

ii. 

Present.  Since  attaining  independence  in  August  1957,  the  present-day 
Malaysia  has  actively  forged  cooperation  with  countries  in  different  parts  of  the 
Asia-Pacific  and  Indian  Ocean  regions.  Malaysia’s  active  initiatives  began  with 
Southeast  Asian  regionalism.  Since  the  1990s,  it  has  grown  deeper  within,  and 
gradually  extended  between  the  two  regions.  Over  the  decades,  Malaysian 
activism  has  developed  into  multiple  layers  of  diplomatic,  developmental  and 
defence  cooperative  platforms  between  and  across  the  two  ocean  regions.  These 
include  ASEAN-led  cooperation  namely  East  Asian  integration,  ASEAN-Plus 
and  other  parallel  dialogue  processes,  South-South 
Three 
Cooperation,  the  Singapore-Kunming  Rail  Link  (SKRL),  the  ASEAN-Mekong 
Basin  Development  Cooperation  (AMBDC),  the  Malacca  Straits  Patrol  (MSP),
the Trilateral Cooperative Arrangement (TCA) in the Sulu Sea and Sulawesi Sea, 
the Malaysia Field Hospital (MFH) in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, the multi-level 
defence partnerships with countries across the Pacific and the Indian Oceans, as well 
as our longstanding contributions to UN Peacekeeping Operations in various 
parts of the world. These platforms are indispensable instruments for pursuing 
Malaysia’s core interests and international standing.

(APT) 

iii. 

Future. In light of the fast-changing international environment, it is timely for 
Malaysia to envision a new direction, turning the existing platforms into a more 
coherent Malaysian middlepowership, while cultivating new possibilities. The bridging 
linchpin vision is a crucial step to move into this direction, to better position Malaysia 
at a time when the big power dynamics in and across the two regions are creating 
greater uncertainties for Malaysia. 

48.

The  vision  may  serve  to  enhance  both  internal  resilience  and  external  partnerships. 
Internally,  as  a  developing,  multi-ethnic  country  with  Muslim  majority,  Malaysia 
embraces the values of inclusivity, consultative dialogue and progressiveness, in tandem with 
the concepts of ‘Rahmatan lil ‘alamin’ (mercy to all) and ‘Maqasid Syari’ah’ (higher objectives 
of the syariah). The diversity of culture can be an asset and strength for the nation to be a 
bridging linchpin between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. Malaysia is known to 
be courageous and quick-witted like the Sang Kancil (mousedeer). As narrated in Sejarah Melayu 
(the Malay Annals), the mousedeer spirit is exemplary for its smart and adroit manoeuvres 
to  survive.  The  bridging  linchpin  vision,  by underscoring  Malaysia’s  non-aligned  and 
inter-regional potentials, increases our contributions as a credible partner in the eyes of the 
international community.

18

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

STRATEGIC OUTLOOK

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

Malaysia’s  present  and  future  interests  are  tied  to  an  uncertain  and  ever-changing  security 
environment. This chapter first describes Malaysia’s strategic outlook for the next ten years. 
It  then  lays  out  the  Government’s  long-term  strategy,  charting  the  direction  to  protect  the 
national interests, particularly to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity, in line with 
the shifting regional and global security environment.

As  a  result  of  the  uncertainties  at  the  regional  and  global  levels,  the  international  strategic 
landscape  is  becoming  more  complex  and  unpredictable  in  the  coming  years.  Although 
Malaysia is not beset by military threats or conflicts at the present moment, the nation still 
faces three main security challenges. They are: (1) uncertain big power relations; (2) complex 
Southeast Asian neighbourhood; and (3) increasing non-traditional security threats. 

A Changing Security Environment

The  increasingly  volatile  external  environment  has  caused  a  wide  range  of  uncertainties, 
posing  growing  risks  towards  Malaysia’s  national  interests.  This  development  has  the
potential to undermine regional stability and global peace in the long run.

Globally, there has been a shift in economic and military power. This shift is highlighted 
by intensifying power competition and potential polarisation, increasing xenophobia, more 
prevalent  non-state  actors,  more  lethal  trans-boundary  threats,  inevitable  globalisation 
processes, uneven access to technology and fragile ecological systems. 

Regionally,  the  intensifying  power  competition  is  concentrated  more  in  Southeast  Asia.  This 
rivalry is not only heightening the longstanding tension in the region but also has extended to 
other sectors from trade and technology, to resource management and functional exchanges 
to infrastructure and connectivity development.

While  this  big  power  competition  and  their  attempts  to  increase  influence  may  present 
opportunities for Malaysia and other regional countries, at the same time, it may complicate 
regional  cooperation.  The  attempts  may  cast  shadows  over  Southeast  Asia’s  stability  and 
prosperity, potentially challenging ASEAN centrality. These developments have led to a more 
complicated,  unpredictable  outlook  with  the  potential  to  disrupt  the  regional  security 
environment.  Malaysia  may  face  challenges  on  a  more  serious  scale  and  scope  never 
experienced before. 

7.

Three challenges that will shape Malaysia’s strategic outlook for the next ten years are identified 
as follows:

i. 

ii. 

Uncertain big power relations. This refers to the US- China 
interactions  and
their  relations  with  other  powers.  These  two  big  power  relations  are  the  most 
important bilateral relations in the contemporary world and also the most important 
external factor for Malaysia. The bilateral ties have always been marked by a mix of 
cooperation  and  competition,  with  implications  for  regional  stability,  security  and 
prosperity. Their interactions affect other countries’ policies and actions.

Southeast Asian neighbourhood. While big power politics affect Malaysia as 
consequences of power, the Southeast Asian neighbourhood impacts Malaysia because 
of  its  proximity.  Due  to  geographical  proximity,  Malaysia’s  national  security 
and  interests  are  affected  by  its  immediate  neighbours’  actions,  policies  and 
spillovers  of  their  internal  developments  as  well  as  bilateral  relations  among  the 

20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

ASEAN  member  states.  There  is  also  a  greater  regional  interdependence  due  to 
proximity.  Hence,  the  Government  is  giving  emphasis  to  shared  prosperity, 
shared security and shared identity at the regional level.

iii. 

Non-traditional security threats. These threats, primarily those that compromise
human security and the environment, are escalating. These threats come in all forms 
such as extremism and terrorism, kidnapping for ransom, sea robbery and piracy as 
well as cyber threats. Examples include the Lahad Datu incursion in 2013, the repeated 
Abu Sayyaf Group armed abductions in the eastern waters of Sabah, the hijacking of 
MT Orkim Harmony off eastern Tanjung Sedili, Kota Tinggi in 2015 and cyber 
attacks in Singapore in 2018. Natural disasters are another form of non-traditional 
threats  are 
security  threat 
unpredictable and may occur anywhere, anytime and to anyone. These threats are 
transboundary in nature and cannot be addressed single-handedly without the 
cooperation of other countries.

in  Southeast  Asia.  These  non-traditional 

Developments in recent years suggest that the three factors will become more complex and will 
cost the nation dearly if not handled appropriately.

The Uncertain Big Power Relations

Big power relations are becoming more unpredictable. Despite their continuing cooperation 
and dialogue, the United States of America (US) and China have entered into a new phase 
where  bilateral  relations  are  marked  more  by  rivalry  than  accommodation.  The  National 
Security  Strategy  and  National  Defense  Strategy  documents,  published  by  the  US  in 
December  2017  and  January  2018  respectively,  describe  China  as  a  “strategic  competitor” 
and  a  “revisionist  power”.  Both  sides  are  embroiled  in  an  increasingly  bitter  trade  war, 
accompanied  by  technology  decoupling,  maritime  tensions  and  other  points  of  friction. 
China’s  occupation  and  militarisation  as  well  as  related  activities  in  the  South  China 
Sea,  along  with  the  US  Freedom  of  Navigation  Operations  (FONOPs)  and  other  powers’ 
similar  actions,  have  turned  the  overlapping  sovereign  claims  issue  into  a  big-power  game. 
Incursions  by  foreign  government  vessels  off  the  coast  of  Sabah  and  Sarawak  are  clear 
challenges to Malaysia’s sovereign rights in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in the South 
China  Sea  as  provided  by  international  law.  Tensions  have  sparked  in  the  South  China 
Sea  with  the  arrival  of  warships  from  outside  the  region.  The  growing  rivalry  and 
action-reaction between the powerful nations have raised the risk of regional polarisation.

At  this  point  of  time,  when  multilateralism  appears  to  be  in  question  and  old  alliances  in 
doubt,  protectionism  and  transactional  politics  are  on  the  march.  As  unipolarity  fades  and 
chaos  surrounding  Brexit  continue,  the  West’s  influence  will  continue  to  decline.  These 
developments  have  raised  questions  on  global  leadership,  casting  doubts  on  the 
international  community’s  capability  to  reach  consensus  and  take  collective  actions  on  a 
range of transnational and regional issues. Meanwhile, the Russia-West standoff intensifies 
as  the  conflicts  in  Afghanistan,  Syria,  Yemen  and  elsewhere  in  West  Asia  and  Africa 
regions continue. US-Iran tension is also escalating. The growing convergence of Russian, 
Iranian  and  Turkish  interests  is  changing  the  Eurasian  geopolitical  landscape.  Other 
geopolitical developments include the expansion of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation 
(SCO) in 2018 (India and Pakistan joining the regional group that consists of Russia, 
China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan), which is reshaping the security and 
economic connectivity between and across the Central and South Asian regions. Despite the
ongoing  post-Cold  War  geopolitical  reconfigurations  in  Eurasia  and  West  Asia,  South  Asia 
remains beset with conflicts. Tensions between India and Pakistan have worsened, especially after 
the two nuclear-armed neighbours exchanged cross-border fire in the disputed Kashmir in late 2019. 

8.

9.

10.

21

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

China continues to implement its Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), which aims at reviving the 
Silk  Road  by  constructing  a  vast  network  of  infrastructure,  transportation  and  trade  links 
across  Asia,  Europe  and  Africa.  The  country’s  economic  and  diplomatic  activism  has  been 
pursued  side-by-side  with  its  military  modernisation,  institutional  initiatives  (e.g.  the  Asian 
Infrastructure Investment Bank [AIIB], the Mekong-Lancang Cooperation [MLC], Xiangshan 
Forum) and perceived aggressive actions over the South China Sea. Regional countries have 
reacted  differently  to  these  developments.  Some  are  amenable  to  China’s  emerging  role  in 
regional architecture and global order, whilst others are uneasy about it.

Parallel to these developments is the revival of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (the Quad) 
by Australia, India, Japan and the US in 2017. By 2018, each of the Quad countries had 
announced its own version of the “Indo-Pacific” strategies respectively, expressing its security 
roles and connectivity cooperation scheme. The Quad countries emphasise the importance 
of rules-based order, underscoring the freedom of navigation and openness of sea lanes, while 
promoting sustainable infrastructure development practices.

Amidst  growing  power  competition  between  the  contending  interests,  infrastructure 
connectivity cooperation joins maritime security as chessboards of Asian geopolitics.

On the maritime front, the US has stepped up its FONOPs in various parts of the disputed 
waters of the South China Sea. Australia, France, Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom 
have registered their respective concerns over the issue, whether through their own initiatives 
or through joint statements. India and other countries have similarly called for safeguarding 
the freedom of navigation.

On the connectivity front, Japan has been active in implementing the Partnership for Quality 
Infrastructure since 2015. This initiative started concurrently with the establishment of the 
China-backed AIIB. It was followed by the announcements of bilateral, trilateral and coalition 
partnerships  between  and  among  the  Quad  members  on  connectivity  cooperation.  The  US 
released  its  Indo-Pacific  Economic  Vision  in  July  2018  while  the  European  Commission 
presented the EU-Asia Connectivity Strategy in September 2018.

All these developments have both direct and indirect impacts on East Asia, including Southeast 
Asia,  presenting  opportunities  as  well  as  challenges.  East  Asia  is  the  region  where  most  of 
Malaysia’s national interests are concentrated. Within the region, the outlook is mixed. 
Economically,  East  Asia  remains  the  most  vibrant  and  integrated  region.  Security  wise, 
however, it is a region with multiple potential flashpoints. While there have been some attempts 
at resumptions of diplomacy in East Asia between the two Koreas, between the US and North 
Korea, between China and Japan, the security of the region remains uncertain. The situation in 
the Korean Peninsula is still tense. The Taiwan Strait is still considered a potential conflict 
zone.    Elsewhere,  in  Southeast  Asia  and  other  parts  of  the  region,  territorial  disputes  and 
overlapping claims between and among states have remained unresolved.

Malaysia maintains friendly relations with all countries and seeks peaceful resolution of 
disputes based on international law. The South China Sea should be a platform for cooperation 
and connectivity, not an area of confrontation or conflict area, which is in line with the spirit 
of Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN). This cooperation is crucial to ensure 
freedom  of  navigation  and  overflight  as  provided  by  international  law,  including  the  1982 
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Malaysia insists on the use of 
diplomacy and international law to manage disputes.

22

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

ASEAN  and  ASEAN-led  mechanisms  continue  to  serve  as  indispensable  platforms  for 
mitigating all of these challenges. ASEAN unity and centrality are a foundation for 
managing power dynamics and regional uncertainties. In June 2019, ASEAN issued the 
“ASEAN  Outlook  on  the  Indo-Pacific”.  This  document  reiterates  ASEAN’s  inclusivity 
principle, while stressing ASEAN’s central role in leading closer cooperation, shaping the 
regional architecture and ensuring peace, stability and prosperity for the peoples in Southeast 
Asia  as  well  as  in  the  wider  Asia-Pacific  and  Indian  Ocean  regions.  Overall,  this  document 
interprets  ASEAN’s  commitment  to  be  an  honest  broker  in  creating  a  safe,  peaceful  and 
prosperous environment.

The Complex Southeast Asian Neighbourhood

Malaysia’s  security  is  directly  tied  to  the  stability  of  Southeast  Asia.  While  ASEAN,  as  one 
community,  has  been  successful  in  managing  many  regional  problems,  the  fact  is  that 
relations between and among ASEAN member states are more dynamic and complex. 

Malaysia is the only country that shares borders with the vast majority of Southeast Asian 
countries, either land or maritime. Due to the nation’s geographical centrality in Southeast Asia 
and colonial legacies in the region, Malaysia has yet to resolve land demarcation and maritime 
delimitations issues with some of its neighbours.

In addition to territorial and sovereignty disputes, there are other bilateral issues affecting 
Malaysia’s  interests  in  the  neighbourhood.  These  include:  (1)  conflicting  interests  extended 
from territorial disputes (e.g. illegal fishing in Malaysian waters); (2) contentious spillover from 
internal conflicts of neighbouring countries; and (3) refugee crises sparked by regional states’ 
domestic issues.

Bilateral  disputes  aside,  there  are  also  shared  problems  that  bind  Malaysia  and  other 
regional  countries  together.  These  problems:  (1)  affect  nearly  every  country  in  the  area  or 
neighbourhood;  (2)  could  not  be  handled  effectively  by  any  country  alone;  and 
(3) necessitate cooperation and collective action among the affected countries. Such problems 
encompass both traditional and non-traditional security challenges, including extremism, sea 
robbery, piracy and cross-boundary environmental issues such as haze problems resulting from 
forest fires in neighbouring countries.

Geographical  location  confers  both  advantages  and  disadvantages.  While  proximity  is  the 
source of bilateral issues, it also has put Malaysia and our immediate neighbours in a state of 
interdependence in security, economy and social spheres. A case in point is maritime security 
challenges.  Strategically  located  astride  the  Straits  of  Malacca  and  Singapore,  Malaysia  is  at 
the crossroads of key trade flows between the East and  West.  More than 30 percent of global 
seaborne trade passes through the Straits of Malacca and Singapore which makes it imperative 
for the littoral states, i.e. Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, to maintain and strengthen 
cooperation between them. None of these three littoral states is singly able to ensure the 
security of the strategic waterways. 

Currently,  Malaysia  together  with  Indonesia,  Singapore  and  Thailand  are  coordinating 
maritime patrol programmes, under the Malacca Straits Patrol (MSP), to combat sea robberies 
and other forms of maritime security issues. Additionally, the four countries also work with 
the London-based International Maritime Organisation (IMO), a United Nations specialised 
agency, to ensure the safety of navigation and to mitigate pollution risk from ships plying the 
Straits of Malacca. A similar initiative was implemented to increase the level of maritime 
security in the Sulu and Sulawesi Seas through the Trilateral Cooperative Arrangement
(TCA) between Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines signed in 2016. These collaborations 

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

23

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

illustrate  the  efforts  of  regional  countries  in  pursuing  the  main  objective  of  regional  peace, 
security and stability. All these collaborations as well as other defence cooperation mechanisms 
will be elaborated in Chapter 6: International Defence Engagement.

The Government is committed to pursue a multi-pronged approach to effectively defend the 
nation’s security and interests in the Southeast Asian region. This does not only consist of 
ASEAN and ASEAN-led mechanisms, but also other approaches that have proven to be 
effective  in  managing  regional  issues.  They  include:  bilateral  diplomacy,  international 
law and a web of partnerships involving countries within and beyond Southeast Asia. An 
example of such partnerships is the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA), which consists 
of  Australia,  Malaysia,  New  Zealand,  Singapore  and  the  United  Kingdom  that  will  be 
discussed in Chapter 6.

ASEAN  will  continue  to  be  the  cornerstone  of  Malaysia’s  foreign  policy.  It  is  an 
indispensable  platform  for  Malaysia  and  member  states  to  tackle  shared,  region-wide  issues 
including  promoting  intra-ASEAN  confidence-building  measures,  forging  cooperation  with 
big  powers,  facilitating  Asian  trade  and  investment  as  well  as  tackling  economic  challenges, 
environmental problems, contagious diseases and other non-traditional security issues. 

The Non-Traditional Security Threats

Non-Traditional Security (NTS) issues involve non-state actors and trans-border crime with
an  asymmetric  character,  which  have  direct  as  well  as  indirect  impacts  to  social,  political, 
economic  and  environmental  sectors.  Terrorism  is  among  the  main  NTS  threats  to  this 
country,  this  region  and  the  wider  world.  Apart  from  terrorism,  threats  such  as  extremism, 
hijacking and cyber attack might disrupt internal stability, cause loss of life as well as paralyse 
Critical  National  Information  Infrastructures  (CNII).  Other  threats  such  as  sea  robbery, 
kidnapping  and  illegal  fishing  might  disrupt  Sea  Lines  of  Communication  (SLOC)  and 
affect the safety of navigation, thus resulting in losses to the nation.

Among the factors attributed to these threats are the porous land border between states, 
globalisation,  communication  and  transportation  facilities  and  other  emerging  trends  in 
various parts of the world. These trends include self-radicalisation through social media, rapid 
diffusion of Internet of Things (IoT), extreme ideologies, identity politics and so forth.

The  enduring  NTS  threats  that  continuously  affect  Malaysia’s  interests  are  terrorism  and 
extremism,  cyber  threats,  maritime  security  threats,  proliferation  of  Weapons  of  Mass 
Destruction (WMD) and Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosives (CBRNe) 
threats and natural disasters.

Terrorism  and  Extremism.  The  threats  of  terrorism  and  extremism  to  Malaysia’s  security 
are growing. From February 2013 to September 2019, the authorities arrested 511 individuals 
with suspected links to terrorism. Out of this, 336 were locals whilst 175 were foreigners. All of 
them were linked to Abu Sayyaf groups and were suspected of plotting attacks targeting 
places of worship, as well as channelling funds to Malaysian Daesh members in Syria and the 
Jemaah Anshorut Daulah (JAD) group in Indonesia. This reflects the transboundary nature of 
the threat.

The magnitude and forms of terrorist threats to Malaysia are tied to developments in 
neighbouring countries as well as West Asia and other regions. Returning fighters have come to 
Southeast Asia to exploit opportunities to forge ties with local terrorist networks. Hundreds 
of Southeast Asian militants, including those from Malaysia, who fought in Syria, Iraq and 
Afghanistan have returned to this region, raising the Government’s concern.

24

      
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Terrorist  activities  such  as  spreading  radical  ideology,  recruiting,  suicide  attacks  and 
kidnappings have caused chaos, instilled fear and threatened public safety in various parts of the 
region. Most attacks have been targeted at governments, Western interests, places of worship and 
entertainment outlets. In June 2016, a bar in Puchong was attacked with a grenade, injuring eight 
people. Subsequently in 2017, Philippines-based militants attempted to emulate Daesh’s modus 
operandi by trying to establish an affiliated province in Marawi. This led to an urban warfare 
with the government forces attempting to retake the place. In July 2018, a suicide car bomb 
attack in Basilan, Philippines, killed 11. The perpetrator is believed to be a Daesh member from 
Morocco, based in the southern Philippines. Such incidents could happen in other parts of 
this region.

Terror  incidents  in  Malaysia  and  neighbouring  countries  have  proved  that  the  return  of 
experienced  terrorists  after  the  defeat  of  Daesh  in  Syria  and  Iraq,  poses  increased  risks  to 
Southeast Asia. To stay  relevant  after  its  downfall,  Daesh  has  reiterated  the  need  to 
continue the war in its supporters’ home countries. The international terrorist organisation 
has been manipulating social media to propagate and spread its narratives to followers. The 
death of Daesh’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in October 2019 has raised concerns of possible 
acts of revenge by his followers.

Extremist threats throughout the world are often linked to online self-radicalisation. Amateurs 
or lone wolf  attackers  can easily  get  information through internet sources which could 
influence them to become terrorists.

32.

33.

34.

25

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

Transnational threats require transnational solutions. The threats of terrorism and extremism 
in Southeast Asia can be mitigated through efficient information gathering and close 
cooperation among ASEAN member states. Cognisant of the need to improve the mechanisms 
of intelligence sharing on militant activities in the region, ASEAN has launched the ASEAN 
Our Eyes Initiative (OEI), a strategic-level information sharing platform in order to increase 
cooperation among ASEAN member states to counter extremism.

Malaysia will continue to actively combat all forms of terrorism and extremism at the international 
levels.  As part of a holistic anti-terror campaign, the Government has established the Southeast 
Asia  Regional  Centre  for  Counter-Terrorism  (SEARCCT);  the  prominent  institution  places  
Malaysia in the leading position to tackle region-wide security issues. 

Cyber Threats. Cyber space is the new domain for national security and geopolitics. State and 
non-state actors use a variety of methods to undermine the security of a nation without firing a 
shot. Cyber threats are likely to grow in Malaysia, in line with this global trend. CNII including 
banking systems, power supplies, seaports and airports, as well as health services are vulnerable 
to hacking and other forms of cyber crimes. There has been a significant rise in the number 
of cyber attacks worldwide, especially since 2006. Major attacks on critical infrastructure have 
already occurred in Germany, Iran, Ukraine and elsewhere. In 2015, cyber attacks on a power 
grid in Ukraine switched off 30 substations, leaving about 230,000 people without electricity. 
The cyber attacks took place during an ongoing conflict in the country at that time and were 
attributed to a state actor hacker group. These attacks indicate how cyber space has become 
another militarised domain.

Furthermore, the emerging and disruptive technologies such as IoT, Cloud Computing, Big 
Data, Deep Learning, 5G and Artificial Intelligence (AI) have exposed military operations to 
cyber threats. They may disrupt system functions, as well as modify and steal data. The 
country’s cyber governance, led by the National Cyber Security Agency (NACSA), is in need of 
more investment, coordination, enforcement and an active response strategy across the board 
at the national, state, corporate and community levels. The MAF through the Cyber 
Defence Operation Centre (CDOC) is a strategic partner of NACSA’s National Cyber 
Coordination and Command Centre (NC4), and plays a vital role in the protection of 
CNII including response, communication and coordination in the event of a cyber crisis. 
CDOC monitors the cyber defence situational awareness while NC4 monitors the national 
cyber situational awareness encompassing the public and private sectors in Malaysia.

Critical  infrastructure  in  most  countries  including  Malaysia  were  developed  using  analogue 
technology  and  were  much  less  susceptible  to  cyber  attacks.  However,  this  has  changed  and 
most CNIIs are now fully digital and internet dependent, putting them at risk of cyber attacks. 
In recognition of this, Malaysia has identified 10 CNII sectors to be protected and preserved 
at all times.1 

Facing uncertainties in the rapidly evolving digital era, the Government is determined to take 
effective  measures  to  protect  the  country’s  CNII  from  cyber  attacks.  Malaysian  defence 
planners  are  developing  a  coherent  cyber  doctrine  in  line  with  the  Malaysia  Cyber  Security 
Strategy (MCSS) to enhance defence resilience and cyber security that requires among other 
things, putting in place the right management and operational governance mechanisms with 
cyber-savvy manpower and right technology.

1 The 10 CNII refers to the defence and security sectors, banking and finance, information and communication, energy, transportation, 
help service, government, emergency service, food and agriculture.

26

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

The  MAF  has  recognised  cyber  electromagnetic  as  a  new  operational  domain.  This  domain 
provides critical capabilities that enables the MAF to conduct operations safely across all other 
domains.

The usage of Unmanned Systems such as drones as destructive weapons has become a more 
widespread practice. In September 2019, an attack employing drones was launched  against 
Saudi oil processing facilities. Meanwhile, rebel groups in Syria had executed multiple 
strikes on military bases utilising drones with explosive payloads. Such incidents prove that 
these threats are a reality that we must confront.

For the purpose of military operations, the combination of cyber operations with Electronic 
Warfare (EW) capabilities forms up the Cyber Electromagnetic Activities (CEMA) efforts to 
protect CNII. EW is a promising countermeasure element in combating drones of all sizes and 
mission profiles. Defence can be carried out through EW to disrupt the navigational system, 
communication, fuses and weapon trigger functions, and may potentially take over the control 
of the drones. 

In the near future, a combination of weapons and AI technology will pose a new threat to the 
nation. Potentially, AI will not only increase the efficiency and lethal effect of kinetic weapons, 
but also guide weapons. Such AI-guided weapons, defined as Autonomous Weapons Systems 
(AWS), can independently select and attack targets without human intervention. Therefore, the 
supporting  other  military  operations 
current  MAF  doctrine  dictates  CEMA 
that will face these new threats.

in 

Since  cyber  security  threats  are  transnational  in  nature,  overcoming  the  threats  necessitates 
regional and global level cooperation. Therefore, it is necessary for ASEAN member states to 
implement practical confidence-building measures and adopt a set of common, voluntary and 
non-binding norms of responsible state behaviour in cyber space. The measures taken are also 
to enhance member states’ trust and confidence in the use of cyber space to its full potential to 
bring about greater regional economic prosperity and integration.

Maritime  Security  Threats.  Sea  robbery  and  piracy  have  long  been  threats  to  ships  and 
seafarers  sailing  through  Malaysian  waters.  These  threats  have  led  to  the  formation  of 
multilateral initiatives such as the MSP and TCA that aims to eradicate sea robbery and piracy 
effectively. The Government has also established the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency 
(MMEA), to overcome increasing maritime security threats. Non-traditional threats, like kidnap 
for ransom, smuggling, human trafficking and other illegal activities in the maritime domain have
brought  about  more  challenges  to  Malaysia.  For  example,  the  Kidnap  for  Ransom  Group 
(KFRG) and Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) actively abduct hostages from the eastern coast of Sabah to
extort ransoms for their release. Thus, closer cooperation between Malaysia and neighbouring 
countries, international maritime organisations as well as the private sectors is important to 
overcome all these threats.

Rampant illegal fishing activity is another maritime security threat to the nation. This issue 
has  impacted  the  national  economy  and  complicated  efforts  to  ensure  a  sustainable 
fisheries industry in the MMZ. Every year, Malaysia loses up to RM6 billion due to illegal 
fishing activities. Approximately 980 thousand tonnes of the country’s sea-based produce 
is lost annually. It adversely affects biodiversity, associated and dependent species and the 
wider  ecosystem.  Encroachment  by  foreign  fishing  vessels  undermines  Malaysia’s  economy, 
security  and  sovereignty.  The  Government  is  currently  tackling  this  issue  through 
collaboration between maritime enforcement agencies involving integrated operations such as 
Op Naga conducted in the east coast of Peninsular Malaysia.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

27

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

Proliferation  of   WMD  and  CBRNe  Threats.  The  proliferation  of  WMD  still  constitutes 
a serious concern for the nation and the world. Additionally, the loosening of control elements 
in  the  movement  of  dual-use  components  have  contributed  to  the  proliferation  of  WMD. 
In  relation  to  this,  there  are  concerns  on  the  use  of  CBRNe  weapons  by  terrorists  in  this 
country. Easily accessible bio-technology and low production costs make it easier for terrorist 
groups to build biological weapons. This matter is being viewed seriously by the Government 
where  MINDEF  is  the  lead  agency  for  the  implementation  of  the  Biological  and  Toxin 
Weapons  Convention  (BTWC).  The  Government  is  currently  upgrading  capabilities  and 
coordination for responding to the possible CBRNe threats and disasters.

Natural Disasters and Environmental Hazards. Malaysia faces a range of environmental 
security issues. The nation is exposed to natural and environmental hazards such as floods, 
cyclonic storms, landslides, haze, droughts, tsunamis, hazardous and toxic waste problems, as 
well  as  air  and  water  pollution.  Climate-related  natural  disasters  and  other  extreme  weather 
incidents are on the rise, threatening the security and health of the rakyat as well as national 
development.  From  1998  to  2018,  Malaysia  experienced  51  natural  disasters,  with  over 
3  million  people  affected  and  281  people  deaths.  Out  of  these,  floods  affected  over  770 
thousand  people,  killed  148  people  and  caused  approximately  RM5.82  billion  in  damages. 
The 2015 flood is the worst in Malaysia’s environmental history, superseding the 1967 flood. 
2016 was the hottest year ever recorded in Malaysia. The recurring haze-smoke problems caused 
by forest fires in the neighbouring country have harmful effects on the health of the rakyat and 
disrupt  the  economy.  Exceedingly  high  Air  Pollutant  Index  (API)  in  the  past  forced  the 
Government  to  declare  climate  emergencies  three  times  in  different  parts  of  the  country 
(September 1997, August 2005 and June 2013).

The Government is committed to fighting global warming. It continues to prioritise the goal 
of cutting carbon emissions in compliance with the 2016 Paris Climate Agreement. The 
Government will introduce a Climate Change Act, which will institutionalise a national climate 
change mitigation and adaptation plan.

Long-Term National Strategy

To protect Malaysia’s interests in the face of the emerging challenges and new opportunities as 
described above, the Government is determined to pursue a proactive, long-term strategy.

Defence  elements  are  the  central  components  of  this  national  strategy.  The  defence  strategy 
supports the national strategy through shared prosperity, shared security and shared identity at 
national and regional levels. The process will create a balanced strategic ecosystem, cultivating 
space for wider external partnerships and wider policy options to maximise Malaysia’s potential 
as a bridging linchpin between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions.

This  long-term  strategy  leverages  on  Malaysia’s  geography,  national  character  and  regional 
profile  as  a  proactive  nation  in  shaping  regional  affairs.  Malaysia,  together  with  fellow 
ASEAN  member  states  and  other  partners,  have  actively  implemented  various  initiatives 
on  defence,  developmental  and  diplomatic  spheres  throughout  the  decades  (see  Table  2.1). 
These initiatives have shaped the course of regional affairs by connecting countries, forging 
cooperations and creating institutionalised partnerships along different parts of the two ocean 
regions. These are the advantages upon which Malaysia is determined to build upon, and to 
protect  its  national  interests  while  contributing  to  ASEAN  centrality,  regional  stability  and 
global prosperity in an uncertain security environment.

28

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Table 2.1: Malaysia’s Defence, Development and Diplomatic Initiatives.   

SPHERES

MALAYSIA’S KEY INITIATIVES AND INVOLVEMENTS

Defence

Development

Diplomacy

-
-
-
-
-
-
-

-

-
-

-
-
-

-

ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) & ADMM-Plus
ASEAN Militaries Ready Group (AMRG) on HADR
Malacca Straits Patrol (MSP)
Trilateral Cooperative Arrangement (TCA)
International Monitoring Team (IMT) in Mindanao
Malaysia Field Hospital in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh
Malaysian Defence Cooperation Programme (MDCP)

Singapore-Kunming Rail Link (SKRL) & ASEAN 
Mekong Basin Development Cooperation (AMBDC)
South-South Cooperation
Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme (MTCP)

ASA, ASEAN and ASEAN Community
Neutralisation of Southeast Asia / ZOPFAN
Promoting several international norms such as 
“common but differentiated responsibility” and 
“common and shared heritage of mankind” 
ASEAN Plus Three (APT) & East Asia Summit (EAS)

Malaysia is situated at the heart of the dynamic Asian region. It is a maritime nation with 
continental  roots  that  is  connected  to  mainland  Southeast  Asia  and  Eurasia  by  land,  and 
the South China Sea and the Pacific Ocean on one side, with the Malacca Straits and the Indian 
Ocean on the other.

As a country surrounded by the sea and depending on it for its national well-being, Malaysia is 
a maritime nation by all definitions. All maritime nations, big or small, are characterised by 
three attributes, i.e. resources, risks and resolve. Malaysia has all the three elements:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Resources  and  Interests.  The  maritime  domains  are  one  of  the  sources  of 
Malaysia’s  prosperity.  The  seas,  seabed,  subsoil,  waterways,  airspace  and 
continental shelf are crucial to trade and commerce, marine fisheries and fishery 
resources,  means  of  transportation,  people-to-people  connectivity  and  other 
modes of the nation’s wealth creation;

Risks  and  Challenges.  The  maritime  areas,  at  the  same  time,  are  also  a  source  of 
external threats that challenge Malaysia’s sovereignty and sovereign rights over the 
MMZ,  strategic  waterways,  airspace  and  critical  lines  of  communication. 
These  cover  territorial  disputes  and  overlapping  claims,  big  power  actions  and 
interactions,  sea  robbery  and  piracy,  as  well  as  other  sea-based  non-traditional 
security issues; and

Resolve and Actions. The maritime domain is an area where Malaysia is able to 
demonstrates  its  resolve  to  protect  national  interests  as  well  as  to  influence  and 
contribute to the region. To protect our resources and mitigate risks from the sea as 
outlined  above,  the  maritime  domain  is  an  indispensable  avenue around  which 
Malaysia can transform our national resolve into an array of regional cooperative 
mechanisms.  By  advancing  a  series  of  initiatives  with  ASEAN  member  states, 
Malaysia  has  succeeded  in  turning  ideas  into  concrete  cooperative  arrangements  in 
defence, development and diplomatic spheres. Some of these mechanisms and related 
partnerships are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.

54.

55.

29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

56.

57.

58.

Continental Roots. Emphasising the maritime domain is not to neglect Malaysia’s 
continental stakes. Indeed, while land-based resources, consisting of critical resources and assets 
may bring risks, they are also a source of solution. The external threats and challenges stem 
from continental and maritime as well as airspace origins, historically, presently and into the 
future.  The  resolve  to  promote  regional  integration  and  to  pursue  national  interests  is 
therefore  being  expressed  through  and  along  our  continental  roots,  northward  to  mainland 
Southeast  Asia,  as  well  as  with  potential  link  to  different  parts  of  Eurasia.  Amongst  others, 
Malaysia’s notable efforts were the SKRL and AMBDC in 1995 and the Malaysia-Vietnam 
Joint Submission on the Extended Continental Shelf in 2009. 

More infrastructure and transport connectivity projects are expected to take place in the 
decades to come, necessitating more integrated efforts to protect Malaysia’s interests. This 
requires the MAF and security agencies to be transformed in order to confront more complex 
challenges that require an increase in defence capability for joint missions and operations.

Malaysia’s  Linchpin  Role.  Malaysia  has  the  capability  to  play  three  interrelated  roles: 
bridging, building and binding. Each role adds value and options for countries around the 
two  regions:  Asia-Pacific  and  Indian  Ocean.  Each  serves  as  a  catalyst  for  creating  greater 
developmental and strategic opportunities for Malaysia, increasing our internal resilience and 
external defence partnerships over the long run. Each leverages upon Malaysia’s maritime and 
continental roots.

i. 

ii. 

Bridging.  Geo-strategically  located  in  the  middle  of  Southeast  Asia,  between  the 
Indian and Pacific Oceans, and between the continental north and the maritime south, 
allows   Malaysia  to  serve  as  a  regional  hub  to  bridge  connectivity  in  the  cultural, 
commercial  and  security  spheres.  This  is  where  “shared  prosperity”  meets  with 
“shared  identity”  and  “shared  security”  in  line  with  ASEAN’s  aspiration.  This 
function is similar to the Malacca Sultanate’s historical role, but in modern forms. 
Malaysia  is  able  to  forge  connectivity  and  link  cooperation  on  a  wide  array  of 
activities such as handling non-traditional  security  threats,  establishing  it  as  a 
hub for maritime security around  
the  Malacca  Straits  and  the  South  China 
Sea, a hub for cross-regional trade and e-commerce logistics, a hub for cross-border 
transportation as well as for other physical connectivity.

Building. The second role is inviting multiple partners from both the Pacific and 
Indian Ocean regions  to build interests and stakes in Malaysia and Southeast Asia. 
Its  strategic  geographical  location  allows  Malaysia  to  serve  as  a  regional  hub 
through building the cooperation and partnership of markets, resources and other 
ventures  of  shared  interests  such  as  the  Disaster  Emergency  Logistics  System  for 
ASEAN  (DELSA)  and  World  Food  Programme  -  United  Nations  Humanitarian 
Response  Depot  (WFP-UNHRD)  in  Subang  as  well  as  the  International 
Maritime Bureau (IMB)’s office in Kuala Lumpur. Partnerships like these build 
shared 
transfer 
technology, expand exports and create a niche for Malaysia’s development and 
strategic profile.  These shared   interest  development  can  avoid  dependency  or 
dominance by the big powers.

job  opportunities,  mobilise  resources, 

interests,  create 

iii. 

Binding. The third role is coordinating engagements to initiate regularised 
cooperation (as opposed to ad hoc arrangements) that bind countries together. 
Malaysia has over the past decades succeeded in working with fellow ASEAN member 
states and other partners in establishing a number of institutionalised cooperative 
mechanisms. On the basis of these mechanisms, Malaysia could play a leading role in 
strengthening their linkages and exploring new institutions and cooperation for 

30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

maximising shared prosperity, shared security and shared identity among countries 
along the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. These partnerships, in turn, serve to 
enhance Malaysia’s bridging and building cooperation capacity, and in turn, ASEAN 
centrality.

59.

60.

A reliable defence force is the key to protect Malaysia’s interests over the land, maritime, air and 
cyber electromagnetic domains. Malaysia’s maritime and continental roots necessitate the MAF 
and security agencies to jointly play important roles to effectively protect the nation’s interests 
and defend its sovereignty as well as territorial integrity.  

All of the above factors impact the force structure of the MAF. Based on geographical factors  
that  include  the  two-theatre  reality  and  current  security  landscape,  the  MAF  needs  to  be 
transformed into an integrated, agile and focused force. A more integrated force is needed to 
effectively  defend  Malaysia’s  interests  in  handling  traditional  and  non-traditional  security 
threats. A more agile MAF will be able to respond better to various future operation scenarios. 
Finally, a more focused force can optimise resources towards achieving the objectives and goals 
of  required  operations.  All  of  these  are  imperative,  in  order  to  more  effectively  protect 
Malaysia’s interests as a maritime nation with continental roots, serving as a bridging linchpin 
between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions.

PACIFIC
OCEAN

PACIFIC 
OCEAN

MALAYSIA

MALAYSIA

INDIAN 
INDIAN
OCEAN
OCEAN

Malaysia, a bridging linchpin...

31

 
 
 
 
SECTION 2
STRATEGY

CHAPTER 3

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

DEFENCE STRATEGY

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

To confront the increasing challenges posed by the uncertain security environment, the 
Government is determined to execute the national defence strategy with a renewed emphasis 
on enhancing its overall defence capability. This strategy is guided by a new National Defence 
Framework  aimed  at  boosting  Malaysia’s  defence  preparedness  while  maximising  its
potentials as a maritime nation with continental roots, serving as a bridging linchpin between 
the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions.

Malaysia’s  defence  strategy  is  centred  on  three  pillars,  namely  Concentric  Deterrence, 
Comprehensive Defence and Credible Partnerships. This chapter illuminates how the 
Government  will  implement  this  strategy  in  ways  that  serve  Malaysia’s  National  Defence 
Interests and Objectives.

The  steps  taken  to  pursue  the  long-term  defence  strategy  include:  (1)  upgrading 
defence  capability  and  strengthening  jointness  across  the  MAF  and  other 
security agencies; (2) increasing security awareness and defence preparedness through the 
whole-of-nation  approach;  and  (3)  taking  a  more  active  role  in  advancing  progressive 
initiatives, widening partnerships and shaping regional affairs.

Fundamentally,  Malaysia’s  defence  strategy  seeks  to  transform  the  MAF  into  an  integrated, 
agile and focused force capable of protecting the national interests, particularly defending 
the nation’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. Malaysia adopts a defensive posture, viewing 
force as the last resort in asserting the right to defend the nation, in line with the Charter 
of  the  United  Nations.  This  DWP  identifies  ways  and  means  of  protecting  national 
interests and deterring threats, whilst preserving shared regional peace, stability and prosperity.  

Geography  is  a  vital  link.  The  Government  takes  into  account  Malaysia’s  geographical 
circumstances,  situated  at  the  heart  of  Southeast  Asia’s  strategic  waters  surrounded  by 
important Sea Lines of Communication (SLOC) together with big power realities and domestic 
needs, in pursuing a firm and prudent national defence strategy. The Government is 
determined to ensure that the MAF is able to operate in two   theatres 
simultaneously, 
as Peninsular Malaysia and Sabah and Sarawak are separated by the South China Sea.

National Defence Framework 

Aligning Malaysia’s defence posture with the national security policy and foreign policy 
priorities,  the  Government  has  developed  a  three-part  National  Defence  Framework  that 
consists  of  national  defence  vision,  interests  and  objectives  (refer  Table  3.1).  The  National 
Defence Vision depicts “Malaysia as a secure, sovereign and prosperous nation”. This vision 
forms the basis for the National Defence Interests:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Security. Defending the nation’s land masses, MMZ, strategic waterways, airspace and 
critical lines of communication;

Sovereignty. Preserving independence and preventing external interference; and

Prosperity. Protecting economic prosperity, development and growth opportunities, 
including interests abroad.

34

 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

7.

National Defence Objectives are categorised as follows: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

Developing multiple domain capabilities to detect, deter and deny any threat to 
Malaysia’s national defence interests along the concentric layers of the core, extended 
and forward areas;

Enhancing Malaysia’s internal resilience through comprehensive defence by adopting 
the whole-of-government and whole-of-society approaches;

Strengthening Malaysia’s defence capacity and security through credible partnerships, 
chiefly by promoting innovative initiatives, deepening cooperation and pursuing 
multi-level defence engagements in a complementary manner; 

Advancing  Malaysia’s 
through 
progressive  niche-based  self-reliance  programmes  in  developing  the  nation’s 
defence science, technology and industry; and 

industry 

defence 

catalyst 

as 

a 

Ensuring good governance practices in strengthening the defence sector by 
consolidating transparency, accountability and excellence in pursuing organisational 
transformations.

Table 3.1: National Defence Framework.

NATIONAL DEFENCE VISION

“Malaysia as a secure, sovereign and prosperous nation”

NATIONAL DEFENCE INTERESTS

Security

Sovereignty

Prosperity

Defending the nation’s 
land masses, MMZ, strategic 
waterways, airspace and critical 
lines of communication

Preserving independence 
and preventing external 
interference

Protecting economic 
prosperity, development and 
growth opportunities, including 
interests abroad

NATIONAL DEFENCE OBJECTIVES

Developing multiple 
domain capabilities 
to detect, deter and 
deny any threat to 
Malaysia’s national 
defence interests 
along the concentric 
layers of the core, 
extended and 
forward areas 

Enhancing 
Malaysia’s internal 
resilience through 
comprehensive 
defence by 
adopting the 
whole-of-
government and 
whole-of-society 
approaches 

Strengthening 
Malaysia’s defence 
capacity and security 
through credible 
partnerships, chiefly 
by promoting 
innovative initiatives, 
deepening cooperation 
and pursuing 
multi-level defence 
engagements in a 
complementary 
manner

Advancing 
Malaysia’s defence 
industry as an 
economic catalyst 
and a niche-based 
self-reliance 
stimulant through 
progressive 
programmes in 
developing the 
nation’s defence 
science, technology 
and industry

Ensuring good 
governance 
practices in 
strengthening the 
defence sector 
by consolidating 
transparency, 
accountability and 
excellence in 
pursuing 
organisational 
transformations

[Chapter 4]

[Chapter 5]

[Chapter 6]

[Chapter 7]

[Chapter 8]

35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

8.

Concentric Areas. Based on the geography and national strategic considerations, Malaysia’s 
interests are divided into three layers as in Figure 3.1.

FORWARD AREA

Locations beyond the extended area where 
Malaysia’s national interests are affected

EXTENDED AREA

Malaysian Maritime Zone (MMZ), strategic
waterways, airspace and critical lines of
communications

CORE AREA

The land masses of Peninsular Malaysia,
Sabah and Sarawak; the territorial waters;
as well as the air space above them

Figure 3.1: Concentric Areas. 

9.

Malaysia’s areas of interests must be protected and defended at all costs, against any external 
threats. The Core Area houses the government administrative capital, socio-economic centres 
and  main  population  zones.  The  Extended Area  is  rich  in  living  and  non-living  resources 
especially hydrocarbons, as one of the main sources of Malaysia’s revenue. The Forward Area 
covers locations beyond the extended area, with national interests that include regional stability
and efforts towards global peace.

Fundamental Principles of  Defence    

10.

Malaysia’s defence strategy is developed based on the following principles:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

Interest-based. Developing plans according to the national interests along the 
concentric areas;

Activist neutrality. Adhering to the principles of non-alignment and actively 
promoting cooperation by emphasising inclusivity and shared prosperity, alongside 
shared security and shared identity;

Aspired self-reliance. Reducing dependency by strengthening the local defence 
industry through the advancement of defence science and technology;

Innovation and integration. Enhancing Research and Development (R&D) in 
defence science and technology by emphasising defence capability development 
through jointness across all sectors; and

Good gover nance. Institutionalising good governance in national defence 
management.

39

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Pillars of  National Defence Strategy   

11.

Taking into account the National Defence Framework and the Fundamental Principles of 
Defence, the Government outlines a three-pillar defence strategy to protect Malaysia’s interests 
along the concentric areas. These pillars are Concentric Deterrence, Comprehensive Defence 
and Credible Partnerships. They are interrelated and mutually reinforcing, involving different 
participants, purposes and processes (refer Figure 3.2).

1st Pillar: 
CONCENTRIC 
DETERRENCE

Who
Malaysian Armed 
Forces

2nd Pillar: 
COMPREHENSIVE 
DEFENCE

Who
Whole-of-Government 
& Whole-of-Society

3rd Pillar: 
CREDIBLE 
PARTNERSHIPS

Who
External Partners
 (Bilateral & Multilateral)

Purpose

Purpose

Purpose

"Deterrence"

"Defence Resilience"

"Partnerships"

Dissuading all forms 
of external intrusion 
or conflicts

 Building and strengthening 
internal resilience

Strengthening and widening 
external defence 
partnerships

Process

Process

"Concentric" 

"Comprehensive"

Jointness in defending 
national interests along
 the three concentric layers

Continuously 
building internal unity, 
defence capabilities, 
security preparedness, 
inter-agency coordination, 
and overall resilience

Process

"Credible"

Maintaining Malaysia 
as a credible partner, 
while contributing towards 
capacity-building and 
regional stability

Figure 3.2: Three Pillars of Malaysia’s Defence Strategy.

40

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

12.

13.

14.

Concentric Deterrence, the principal pillar, involves primarily the role of the MAF in 
protecting national interests, particularly defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity by 
dissuading all forms of external intrusion and conflicts. National defence is pursued along 
the  concentric  areas  that  cover  land,  maritime,  air  and  cyber  electromagnetic  domains. 
The operationalisation of this pillar is further discussed in Chapter 4: Future Force.      

Comprehensive Defence involves the synergistic application of both  whole-of-government 
and  the  whole-of-society  approaches  to  defend  the  nation  in  line  with  the  concept  of 
internal 
HANRUH.  The  process  encompasses  a  continuous  effort 
cohesion,  enhancing  defence  preparedness, 
inter-agency  coordination, 
strengthening  nation-building,  as  well  as  boosting  economic  capacity  and  other  aspects  of 
national  resilience  in  a  thorough  and  sustainable  manner.  The  nation’s  defence  is  also 
enhanced  through  KESBAN  that  emphasises  on  pursuing  security  and  development 
simultaneously.  The  operationalisation  of  this  pillar  is  elaborated  in  Chapter  5:  People  in 
Defence.

improving 

to  build 

Credible  Partnerships  refers  to  bilateral  or  multilateral  defence  cooperation  with 
external partners. These partnerships are credible from two angles. First, Malaysia’s credibility as a 
dependable partner is the foundation of our defence engagements with countries in the region 
and the wider world. Second, these engagements benefit Malaysia and our partners in terms of 
defence readiness, security needs and regional stability. The operationalisation of this pillar is 
illuminated in Chapter 6: International Defence Engagement. 

15.

The Government is committed to implement all three pillars to achieve the National Defence 
Vision. The three pillars mirror the cohesion and combination of efforts by the government 
and the society in keeping Malaysia as a secure, sovereign and prosperous nation.

41

    
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

42

CHAPTER 4

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

THE FUTURE FORCE

1.

Developing the Future Force is important in order to implement Concentric Deterrence, the  
DWP’s first pillar of the defence strategy. The MAF serves as the “Nation’s Shield” entrusted 
by the Government to uphold the National Defence Objectives at all times. Hence, the roles of 
the MAF can be summarised as follows:

2.

3.

4.

5.

i. 

ii. 

Primary  Role.  To  protect  national  interests,  particularly  to  defend  national 
sovereignty and territorial integrity from traditional and non-traditional threats by 
conducting maritime, air, land and cyber electromagnetic operations; and

Secondary Role. To conduct Military Operations Other Than War (MOOTW)
including Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR), Search and Rescue 
(SAR) and Non-Combatant Evacuation Operations (NEO) among others, assisting
the civil authorities in enforcement, nation building and supporting world peace 
efforts through the United Nations (UN) Peacekeeping Operations (PKOs).

The force structure and force posture need to be reshaped to better address the uncertain 
security environment. While the MAF force size remains at the current force level throughout 
this DWP period, repurposing and re-prioritisation will be carried out to meet future 
requirements. More emphasis will be given towards enhancing joint capabilities in preparing 
for any contingency; from armed intervention to natural disasters; and realising the need to 
conduct two-theatre operations simultaneously between Peninsular Malaysia, Sabah and 
Sarawak. 

This, in addition to national awareness of the uncertain security environment, coordination 
between the MAF and other security agencies and external partnerships are components of the 
national defence ecosystem.

This chapter will address and explain the force structure that will provide the “deterrence” to 
dissuade both state and non-state actors from threatening national interests that could result 
in  harm  to  Malaysia’s  sovereignty  and  territorial  integrity.  The  chapter  will  also  discuss  the 
capability  requirements  and  the  MAF’s  structure  to  detect,  deter  and  deny  the  traditional 
and non-traditional security threats across the core, extended and forward areas. Finally, this 
chapter identifies the catalyst in developing the capability for the Future Force.

Force Structure

The Government shall develop the MAF into an integrated, agile and focused force, capable of 
responding to traditional and non-traditional threats during peace or conflict, with a high level 
of readiness to perform its operations amid the unpredictable security environment. A critical 
part  in  this  force  development  is  the  Government’s  long-term  investment  in  enhancing  the 
MAF’s preparedness with the necessary assets and equipment, as well as a knowledge-based and 
skilled workforce geared towards the smart soldier concept and other capabilities. The concepts 
of this force are summarised as follows:

i. 

ii. 

Integrated. Jointness and close cooperation across the Services in all stages of the
military process, from research and planning to procurements, training and 
operations;

Agile. Ability to adapt and respond quickly to a variety of threats or critical situations 
while nimble enough to react to contingencies; and

44

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

iii. 

Focused. Prioritising force capability development plan in accordance with the
interest-based principle. 

The  Future  Force  possesses  five  main  characteristics  which  are  jointness,  interoperability, 
theatres  and 
technology-based,  able 
to  operate  simultaneously 
mission-orientated. Possessing these, the force is rapid, deployable and multi-role, capable of 
operating in all four domains covering maritime, air, land and cyber electromagnetic, and able 
to engage multiple challenges along the concentric areas.

two 

in 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

Jointness. Current and future operations of the MAF will continue to be conducted 
in the joint context, under command and control of the Joint Force Headquarters 
(JFHQ). The concept of joint operations  represents troops and assets integration of 
all  three  Services,      assigned  to  the    JFHQ.  Future  conflicts  are  hybrid  and 
multidimensional that require an  orchestration  of a joint force in all stages of the 
military processes to win such conflicts. It will also encompass all states of military 
procees, from research through   procurement  and  into  the  implementation  of 
operations;  regardless of activities in single or multiple domains. This joint concept   
is  vital to achieve maximum synergy of the MAF;

Interoperability. Commonality of doctrines, procedures, systems and equipment is 
very important to achieve interoperability between the three Services of the MAF and 
also  between  the  agencies  that  would  increase  efficiency  during  joint  or 
combined  operations  and  minimise  operation  cost.  Selection  of  assets  and 
equipment should consider the needs of the MAF and security agencies with priorities 
given to products or services from the local defence industry. Interoperability can also 
be extended to ASEAN member states and strategically important nations to achieve 
economies  of  scale  and  high  levels  of  readiness  for  the  Future  Force.  Hence,  it 
facilitates expertise development and confidence building with foreign militaries 
particularly during trainings, exercises and operations;

Technology-Based. The Future Force will incorporate the latest technologies in 
the force structure and posture to fulfil the requirements of current and future 
operations. All planning should embrace the IR4.0, IoT and AI to increase efficiency,
reduce workload and achieve sustainable operation costs in the long run. In order to 
transform the current force structure and posture that rely heavily  on manpower, 
the  MAF  will  review  existing  doctrines  and  incorporate  more  automated  and 
autonomous technologies;

Able to Operate Simultaneously in Two Theatres.  Malaysia’s  geographical  factor 
poses  a  big  challenge  for  the  MAF  to  defend  the  two  theatres  simultaneously. 
Considering the recent developments surrounding the South China Sea and 
learning from the Lahad Datu intrusion in 2013, Sabah and Sarawak now face 
greater risk and are in need of stronger defence. The ability to deploy integrated 
forces  between  the  two  theatres  is  vital  to  defend  Malaysia’s    sovereignty  and 
territorial integrity. Therefore, mobility and reach are the keys for the success of 
the  Future  Force’s  rapid  and  uninterrupted  deployment  between  the  two 
theatres  as  and  when  required.  Realignment  and  redeployment  of  forces 
between  Peninsular  Malaysia  and  Sabah  and  Sarawak  is  another  effort  to 
ensure the success of the two-theatre operation; and

6.

45

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

7.

8.

v. 

Mission-Orientated. Malaysia’s maritime territory covers four important waterways 
namely, the Straits of Malacca, South China Sea, Sulu Sea and Sulawesi Sea. The 
strategic sea and air lines of communications, together with maritime areas that are 
rich in hydrocarbons and sea-based produce must be protected and defended. The 
Government needs to ensure that these lines of communication are safe and secure for 
national assets to ply uninterruptedly between both theatres. The MAF must have the 
capability to deploy forces beyond the landmass and adequate air and maritime
capabilities to increase Maritime Domain Awareness (MDA) in those areas.

The MAF will continue to assist the civil authorities to ensure peace and security as and when 
required by the Government.

Capability Requirements

The Government’s long-term plan to develop the Future Force is focused on the need to build 
capabilities  and  bridge  identified  gaps  to  protect  national  interests,  as  well  as  to  defend  the 
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The essential capability requirements based on priority are 
as follows: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

Strengthening the MAF’s defence intelligence;

Developing Cyber Electromagnetic Activities (CEMA) capability;

Enhancing Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance (ISTAR)
capability;

Building Network Centric Operation (NCO);

Building Satellite Communication (SATCOM) for enhanced Joint Command and 
Control capability;

Sustaining and enhancing the MAF Special Forces capability and operational tempo;

Maritime Domain – Enhancing Maritime Strike and Maritime Sustainment 
capability;

viii. 

Air Domain – Enhancing Air Defence and Air Strike capability;

ix. 

Land Domain – Enhancing firepower, mobility, communications, logistic capability; 
and

x. 

Developing amphibious capability.

9.

Summary  of  the  Future  Force  capability  requirements  is  illustrated  in  Table  4.1.  These 
capability  requirements  will  ensure  the  MAF’s  high  level  preparedness  to  carry  out  of
operations effectively in the designated areas.

46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Table 4.1: Capability Requirements for the Future Force.

COMMAND, CONTROL, COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTERS

INTELLIGENCE, SURVEILLANCE, TARGET ACQUISITION AND RECONNAISSANCE

ALL DOMAINS

CYBER 
ELECTROMAGNETIC 
DOMAIN

SPECIAL FORCES OPERATION

COMBAT SERVICE SUPPORT 

CYBER ELECTROMAGNETIC ACTIVITIES

STRATEGIC STRIKE

AIR DEFENCE/AIR PATROL

AIR DOMAIN

CLOSE AIR SUPPORT

MARITIME AIR PATROL/ANTI-SUBMARINE WARFARE/
ANTI-SURFACE WARFARE

TACTICAL AND STRATEGIC AIR LIFT/COMBAT SEARCH AND RESCUE/MOOTW

ANTI-AIR WARFARE/ANTI-SURFACE WARFARE/
ANTI-SUBMARINE WARFARE

MARITIME 
DOMAIN

PATROL/SEARCH AND RESCUE

MINE WARFARE

STRATEGIC SEA LIFT/AMPHIBIOUS OPERATION/MOOTW

MOOTW/CBRNe

GROUND BASED AIR DEFENCE/
COASTAL DEFENCE

LAND DOMAIN

WATER MOBILITY/
AMPHIBIOUS OPERATION

TACTICAL AIR LIFT/
ARMED RECONNAISSANCE

LAND MOBILITY & 
MANOEUVRABILITY/FIRE POWER

CORE

EXTENDED

FORWARD

The  Government  understands  the  need  to  address  capability  gaps  to  prevent  further 
deterioration  of  the  readiness  level.  This  includes  replacing  obsolete  and  ageing  assets,  and 
maintaining current operational assets. However, considering the current economic challenges 
faced by the nation, the long-term proposed plan to acquire and sustain the required capability 
for the next ten years has to be realistic and reviewed periodically. 

The Government shall provide complete infrastructure support such as camps, bases, military 
housing  (Rumah  Keluarga  Angkatan  Tentera,  RKAT)  and  other  facilities  necessary  to  maintain 
current and future operations. This would include the redeployment of troops to Sabah and 

10.

11.

47

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Sarawak, which requires new camps, bases and RKATs. Infrastructure support will be one of the 
key elements to ensure force readiness and the success of the two-theatre operations.  

12.

In developing the required capability, the MAF will adopt modern technologies such as AI, 
drones and other state-of-the-art surveillance tools to reduce dependence on the workforce 
in conducting related operations.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

Force Posture

Malaysia  renounces  the  use  of  force  as  a  means  of  settling  disputes  or  conflicts  as 
it  advocates  peaceful  settlements  of  those  disputes.  The  Government  manifests  this  by 
adopting a defensive posture of which Concentric Deterrence is an integral part of the national 
defence  strategy.  In  line  with  the  Interest-Based  principle,  the  MAF  will  systematically 
protect the national interests according to the core, extended and forward areas.

Core Area

The MAF is tasked to defend national sovereignty and territorial integrity, covering the 
landmasses,  territorial  waters and the airspace above them. These areas encompass land and 
maritime boundaries with neighbouring countries with dense tropical forests and mountain 
ranges, and expansive coastlines. External threats such as militant groups could infiltrate and set 
up “safe havens” in the Malaysian jungles to conduct insurgency operations. The Lahad Datu 
intrusion  in  2013  was  a  bitter  experience,  an  important  lesson  for  Malaysia  to  continue 
developing jungle warfare capabilities for Counter-Insurgency (COIN) operations as these are 
still relevant in this modern day. 

The landmasses in the core area is also going through urbanisation with the emergence of large 
cities as a result of rapid economic development. This situation poses a new challenge for the 
MAF, especially in its ability to operate effectively in urban areas. The result of disorganised 
Operations in Built-Up Areas (OBUA) can be devastating as witnessed in Mosul and in Marawi 
in 2017. Therefore, the Future Force needs to be able to conduct OBUA and Close-Quarter 
Battle (CQB) more effectively to fulfil current and future operational requirements.

As Malaysia is a maritime nation with land territories divided by the South China Sea and 
with more than 800 islands along its coastline, the MAF will establish an Amphibious Force 
to protect national interests in the core area and beyond. The Amphibious Force needs to be 
equipped with new Multi Role Support Ship (MRSS) as the current logistic support vessels are 
not designed for amphibious operations.1 The MRSS is also essential in conducting two-theatre 
operations and MOOTW when needed.

Throughout this DWP implementation period, priority is given towards enhancing detection 
capabilities  with  sophisticated ISTAR systems supported by a faster decision making and 
communication loop, via NCO initiatives. During the first term of the DWP, the MAF will 
enhance its detection capabilities. For this purpose, the Future Force requires additional new air 
defence  radars,  coastal  surveillance  radars  and  unmanned  systems  to  support  its 
operations in the core area. Communication equipment will also need to be upgraded for 
more secure communications and better coverage.

1 The current KD Sri Indera Sakti (1503) and KD Mahawangsa (1504) were delivered in 1980 and 1983 respectively and are well beyond 
their service life. 

48

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

The  MAF  needs  to  enhance  its  indirect  fire  capability  for  rapid  deployment  and  to  project 
firepower beyond land to deter threats from reaching the core area. The Future Force requires 
155mm Self-Propelled Howitzer (SPH) as the primary indirect fire support which can also be 
used for coastal defence. The MAF also needs to replace their ageing 105mm Light Howitzer 
with newer guns that have longer range and better precision. The MAF will maintain the 
existing Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) for long-range indirect fire support.

The use of modern fighters and Stand-Off Weapons (SOW) means that the MAF needs to have 
a more advanced air defence capability to secure the core area and the airspace above it. The 
Future Force would require a new Medium Range Air Defence (MERAD) system that could 
defeat medium range aerial threats. The MAF will maintain the current Very Short Range Air 
Defence (VSHORAD) systems for force protection. With the addition of MERAD, the MAF 
will gain an integrated layered air defence system as prescribed in the National Air Defence 
Strategy (NADS). 

Mobility and firepower are important for manoeuvring and fighting in modern warfare. The 
MAF  needs  to  replace  its  ageing  Armoured  Vehicles  (AVs)  with  newer  ones  with  better 
protection, increased firepower, higher endurance and with amphibious capability. This is to 
ensure Armoured and Mechanised formations can be deployed throughout the core area where 
terrain can be very challenging particularly in Sabah and Sarawak. The Future Force would also 
require Tactical Transport Helicopters for quick deployment and assault boats for riverine 
and coastal operations. Meanwhile, the MAF will maintain the existing armoured vehicles for 
current operational requirements. Additional Troop-Carrying Vehicles (TCVs) and combat 
engineers’ bridging equipment need to be added to increase mobility within the core area.

For protection of airspace and to support land, maritime and amphibious operations in the 
core area, the Future Force requires Light Combat Aircrafts (LCAs) for Close Air Support 
(CAS), Battlefield Air Interdiction (BAI) and intervention operations to support Multi Role 
Combat Aircraft (MRCA). The LCAs will also perform dual roles as Fighter Lead-In Trainer 
(FLIT) which are currently tasked to the BAE Hawk 108/208 and Aermacchi MB-339. These 
new  aircrafts  will  be  cost-effective  assets  and  can  be  utilised  for  a  wide  range  of  missions, 
operations and exercises. The MAF urgently requires the LCAs to enhance its pilot training 
programme and to ensure sufficient and capable aircrafts for current and future operations.

For maritime operations within the core area, the MAF will deploy Littoral Mission Ships 
(LMS)  that  could  conduct  a  wide  variety  of  missions  including  SAR  and  HADR, 
counter-terrorism and anti-piracy, intelligence gathering and reconnaissance, hydrography and 
mine  countermeasures.  The  LMS  is  modular  by  design  and  can  be  fitted  with  additional 
weapons and systems to meet future operational requirements. Due to urgent operational needs, 
the MAF will acquire additional LMS within this DWP period. The Future Force also requires 
new Fast Interceptor Crafts (FICs) and Special Force Boats (SFBs) which are suited for 
operations in littoral environments. The MAF also plans to acquire Autonomous Underwater 
Vehicles (AUVs) and Mine Disposal Vehicles (MDVs) to support maritime operations in 
the core area.

Extended Area

Malaysia’s MMZ is very vast, covering the EEZ, continental shelf and the airspace above them. 
Air  and  maritime  capabilities  are  needed  to  enhance  the  MDA  for  better  operating  picture 
within the extended area. The MAF needs to achieve Sea Control on the surface and sub-surface 
through Sea Denial and Sea Assertion. Therefore, the MAF relies on two classes of warships 
which are the Littoral Combat Ships (LCSs) and the New Generation Patrol Vessels (NGPVs) 

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

49

 
that  are  able  to  operate  in  these  areas  with  the  required  range,  endurance  and  capabilities. 
The  new  LCS  will  be  complemented  by  helicopters  and  enhanced  Anti-Air  Warfare  (AAW), 
Anti-Surface Warfare (ASuW) and Anti-Submarine Warfare (ASW) capabilities to support its 
missions. Meanwhile, the current NGPV can be retrofitted with additional weapon systems if 
required. The new LCS will replace the older classes of frigates and corvettes in stages.

The MDA will be further enhanced with Maritime Patrol Aircrafts (MPAs) and Medium 
Altitude Long Endurance Unmanned Aerial System (MALE UAS) to conduct maritime 
patrol from air. The MAF requires new Maritime Mission Helicopters to augment the 
capabilities of newer warships that will be operational before the end of the DWP period. All 
the sensors and communication systems from the warships, MPA, MALE UAV and helicopters 
will be linked with the MAF’s NCO Centre for a greater MDA in the extended area. Additional 
air defence radars will achieve complete 24/7 radar coverage as well as control and policing 
over the airspace. 

The  Government  acknowledges  that  it  is  a  challenging  task  for  the  MAF  to  solely  protect 
and defend the extended area. Thus, cooperation with other security agencies such as the 
MMEA and enforcement authorities such as the Department of Fisheries (DOF) could expand 
the coverage to secure the MMZ. The MAF is also tasked to support the enforcement roles of 
other security agencies. 

Forward Area

To protect and defend Malaysia’s national interests abroad and to fulfil global responsibilities 
as well as to conduct operations in the forward area, the MAF relies on its air power (MRCA, 
aerial tankers, strategic airlift), submarine force and Special Forces. To effectively defend the 
forward area, the MRCAs are capable of conducting strategic attacks and Offensive Counter 
Air (OCA) operations against air, maritime and land targets. Currently, the MAF depends on 
its F/A-18D and SU-30MKM aircrafts for these missions and replacements will be made once 
these aircrafts reach the end-of-life by the 14th and 15th Malaysia Plans respectively.2  MRCAs 
are part of an important element to achieve control of the air that consists of radar (sensor) 
and fighter aircraft (shooter). 

For  long-range  naval  strike  and  deterrence  in  the  forward  area,  the  MAF  currently  operates 
two  “Perdana  Menteri”  (Prime  Minister)  class  submarines  which  are  capable  of  conducting 
stealthy manoeuvres at long range with anti-surface and anti-submarine capabilities.3  These 
two submarines were commissioned in 2009 and 2010 respectively and provide the MAF with 
superior  capability  in  monitoring  the  movement  of  foreign  warships  and  submarines  into 
Malaysian waters. 

The MAF also places a high priority on the capabilities of the Special Forces in conducting 
special  operations  in  the  forward  area.  The  Special  Forces  gives  the  Government 
certain  advantages  in  protecting  national  interests  in  the  forward  area.  Priority 
will be given to the MAF Special Forces in acquiring new specialised weapons and equipment 
to  conduct  their  operations.  Additionally,  training  and  capacity  development  will  be 
continued with friendly countries’ and defence partners’ Special Forces.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

2RMAF intends to complete the No.18 Squadron to 18 Hornet aircrafts during the 12th Malaysia Plan. The F/A-18D and SU-30MKM is 
the most potent combination in the region that gives advantages to Malaysia over other countries.   
3KD Tunku Abdul Rahman and KD Tun Razak were built by DCNS and Navantia based on the Scorpene SSK. Beside Malaysia, Chile 
and India operate the same submarine with each having 2 and 6 respectively. Brazil recently ordered 4 Scorpene SSK with the first 
submarine expected to be delivered in 2020.

50

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

29.

30.

The  MAF  continuously  supports  the  United  Nations  Peacekeeping  Operations  (UNPKOs) 
worldwide and other international bodies’ monitoring operations. The MAF has participated 
in numerous PKOs, military staff and observer missions since 1960, including the current 
deployment of a battalion with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The 
MAF will continue to support Malaysia’s foreign policy commitments towards world peace and 
collective security. 

The  MAF’s  forward  area  operation  capability  has  proven  to  be  effective  and  successful  in 
protecting Malaysians and national interests abroad. The MAF Special Forces operatives were 
among  the  first  Malaysian  security  personnel  on  the  ground  in  the  Donetsk  Oblast  to 
negotiate for the safe return of the MH17 “black box” and recovery of the bodies of its 
crew and passengers in 2015. During Op Piramid in 2011, RMAF aircrafts brought home 3,482 
Malaysians stranded during the conflict in Egypt. The MAF was also involved in anti-piracy 
operations  in  the  Gulf  of  Aden,  Arabian  Sea  and  the  Indian  Ocean  during  Op Fajar.  RMN 
vessels and MAF Special Forces operatives were deployed to escort both Malaysian and foreign 
nations’ merchant ships along these high-risk waters and successfully rescued MT Bunga Laurel 
and its crew from Somali pirates without any casualty in 2011. 

51

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

Defence Intelligence

Credible and actionable intelligence consisting of all spectrums of threats is essential to 
safeguard our national interests at home and abroad. Information gathering and analysis, 
security and counter-intelligence as well as special intelligence operations need to be conducted 
across  the  concentric  areas.  Intelligence  can  also  be  gathered  through  cooperation  with 
intelligence agencies at national, regional and international levels.

More  sophisticated  assets  and  equipment  are  required  to  improve  intelligence  gathering  at 
tactical, operational and strategic levels. The assets are to detect foreign subversive action and 
intervention  before  it  reaches  Malaysian  waters.  Among  the  assets  required  include  the 
Geographic Information System (GIS), satellite monitoring system and the expansion of the 
Integrated Intelligence Centre (IIC).

Network-Centric Operations (NCO)

The  networking  of  command  and  control  systems  are  important  to  ensure  smooth 
implementation of joint command and coordination of military units from different Services 
and in conducting multi-domain operations. Continuous and seamless operational integration 
from tactical to strategic level would require new communication equipment and systems, as 
well  as  enhancement  of  secure  SATCOM  to  operate  at  the  most  optimal  decision  making, 
command,  control  and  communications  loop.  This  will  enable  faster  decision-making 
processes resulting in quicker operational tempo. 

The  MAF  needs  to  enhance  the  NCO  Centre  capabilities  through  the  procurement  of 
necessary equipment and infrastructure including remote sensing required for Command, 
Control,  Communications,  Computer,  Intelligence,  Surveillance,  Reconnaissance  and 
Targeting (C4ISRT). This NCO Centre will also conduct optimal Joint Operations combining 
land,  air,  maritime  and  cyber  electromagnetic  domains  to  achieve  maximum  situational 
awareness, as well as rapid and precise decision making in order to overcome and defeat threats 
in all domains.

Command and control network systems are important to ensure seamless joint command and 
coordination of military units from various Services in numerous theatres of operation. The 
NCO is a system that utilises networking sensors in order to achieve shared awareness in the 
field and command centre. Currently, the NCO capability has been developed based on an 
experimental joint operation environment which enables the MAF to operate in a joint and 
integrated manner, with real time information sharing for quick decision making and decisive 
actions to achieve maximum impact.

C4ISRT significantly contributes towards information superiority in order to achieve mission 
effectiveness. This element aims to obtain competitive advantage over an opponent in the 
operation area. The Government is committed to enhance the NCO capabilities required 
within the DWP period.

Cyber Electromagnetic Activities (CEMA)

The MAF, in close cooperation with NACSA and other relevant agencies, play a vital role to 
support the protection of the CNII from constant cyber and electronic attacks. MAF operations 
rely on internet connectivity and secure cyber communications to ensure freedom of action 
in its daily operations. NCO also requires immense utilisation of cyber infrastructure for data 

52

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

links. These are vulnerable nodes that are exposed to deceptions, exploitation, or cyber-attacks. 
Clearly the cyber domain is a new area of sovereignty to be secured and protected at all times.

38.

Hence,  the  MAF  is  planning  to  establish  a  Cyber  Electromagnetic  Command  (CEC)  to 
strengthen  and  coordinate  CEMA.  The  responsibilities  of  the  planned  CEC  will  cover  the 
following operations:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Enhance  Cyber  Operations.  Conduct  cyber  defence  operations,  cyber 
exploitation operation, cyber attack operation and develop cyber expertise, in line 
with the active defence concept as stipulated in MCSS;

Enhance Electronic Warfare (EW) Capabilities. Conduct electronic protection, EW 
support and electronic attacks;

Enhance Spectrum Management. Plan, coordinate and manage the use of the 
Electromagnetic Spectrum through operational procedures, engineering and 
administration to de-conflict all systems.

39.

Under  the  CEC,  the  MAF  will  establish  the  Electronic  Warfare  Support  Centre  (EWSC), 
Electronic and Cyber Warfare Centre (ECWC), and Information Fusion Centre for Cyber 
Electromagnetic Activities (IFC-CEMA) as per Figure 4.2.

Cyber
Attack

Electronic 
Attack

Cyber
Exploitation

PE
Support

Cyber
Defence

Electronic
Protection

OFFENSIVE
ACTIVITIES

INFORMATION
COLLECTION
ACTIVITIES

DEFENSIVE
ACTIVITIES

Figure 4.1: Operationalisation of MAF Cyber Electromagnetic Activity.

53

CEMA Support Activities:Electromagnetic Spectrum ManagementCyber Support OperationElectronic Warfare Support OperationCommand & Control Communication System Technical Analysis / Research & DevelopmentHuman Resource DevelopmentForce Development & ResilienceTarget AcquisitionNon-CEMA Activities:Military Kinetic Detection (Hardkill)Other Information OperationsIntelligence 
 
  
 
 
 
Catalyst for Developing the Future Force

40.

41.

42.

The  capabilities  and  assets  described  in  the  DWP  for  the  Future  Force  are  the  MAF’s 
requirements  to  realise  the  National  Defence  Vision.  The  DWP  states  the  realistic 
requirements  needed  by  the  MAF  to  project  Concentric  Deterrence  based  on  real 
capabilities. The Government will strengthen the force structure and posture to enable the 
MAF to protect Malaysia’s national interests, particularly to defend its sovereignty and 
territorial integrity.

The MAF will continue to build on credible partnerships to bolster its national defence 
capabilities. Concurrently, the MAF will reassess its secondary roles which involve its highly 
valuable  and  critical  assets  and  equipment  in  assisting  the  civil  authorities,  and  its  role  in 
nation building.

The defence capability plans described in this chapter will catalyse the restructuring and 
provide  the  MAF  capabilities  to  develop  its  Future  Force.  The  development  of  defence 
capabilities identified here, will enable the MAF to achieve the set objectives based on national 
interests, whereas a stable budget will ensure the successful implementation of this plan.

54

 
CHAPTER 5

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

PEOPLE IN DEFENCE

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

National defence is for the rakyat, through the participation of the rakyat, in accordance with 
the emphasis on shared responsibility for security. This chapter addresses the role of the rakyat 
in Malaysia’s defence: both the people in the defence workforce and the rakyat, as a whole. It 
also describes in what ways both groups play their roles as the core elements of Comprehensive 
Defence, the second pillar of the national defence strategy.

The Malaysian defence workforce is renowned for its high-level professionalism, adaptability 
and integrity. The workforce plays a major role in defending national sovereignty and 
protecting national interests. The workforce also contributes towards nation-building and 
supports the civil authorities to ensure national security.

The  defence  workforce  consists  of  MAF  personnel  from  all  three  Services  of  the  Regular 
Forces, namely the Malaysian Army, RMN and RMAF; as well as the Regular Forces Reserve 
(RFR), Volunteer Forces, veterans and civil servants in the defence sector.

Integration within the defence workforce and its collaboration with the rakyat are keys to 
ensuring  Malaysia’s  defence  is  comprehensive,  persistent  and  sustainable.  To  ensure  defence 
preparedness, the workforce needs to work closely together to enhance its overall strength by 
developing  innovative  measures  to  cope  with  risks  and  uncertainties.  The  rakyat  needs  to 
maintain security awareness at the highest level, in addition to participating in defence and 
security initiatives. These will ensure the whole-of-nation resilience is attainable. 

This chapter emphasises Comprehensive Defence as one of the core approaches in the DWP. 
The Government is committed to focus on each aspect of this whole-of-nation approach. The 
nation’s defence is not only the responsibility of the MAF, but also government agencies, 
private sectors and the society as a whole. 

Regular Forces

In  order  to  develop  new  capabilities  for  future  operations,  the  MAF  will  realign  its  current 
structure and review the deployment of its personnel in the coming decade. To meet 
future demands, enhanced human resource management is essential in order to continuously 
strengthen the MAF’s preparedness. Operational readiness and mission accomplishment can 
only be ensured if the MAF personnel are recruited, developed and their skills retained in ways 
that enhance the nation’s overall ability to meet and confront all emerging challenges. These 
require  the  MAF  to  reassess  into  the  concept  of  raise,  train  and  maintain  to  achieve 
Comprehensive Defence.

To meet the MAF’s future requirements, the Government shall review the current roles of the 
RFR. The RFR is made up of ex-military personnel who are required to serve for a term of five 
years upon completion of their services.

The Government will also increase Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) activities to support 
the Comprehensive Defence pillar. CIMIC activities represent the MAF’s primary mechanism 
for synergy with civil agencies and the rakyat.

In order to address the ever-changing security environment, the Government will continue to 
modernise the MAF through recruitment, career development and retention of personnel in 
line with the requirements of the Future Force. 

56

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Recruitment

The  Government  will  priotise  the  recruitment    of    highly  qualified  individuals  who  are 
competent,  particularly  in  the  fields  of  science,  technology,  engineering,  management  and 
other  relevant  skills  to  ensure  it  has  a  sustainable  and  highly  compatible  Regular  Forces 
in delivering the National Defence Objectives set out in this DWP.

The  Government  is  assessing  the  increased  use  of  Information  and  Communication 
Technology (ICT) and its application in implementing current and future military operations. 
As such, emphasis will be given to recruit Regular Forces personnel based on the nine pillars 
of the IR4.0.

To  accentuate  a  diverse  MAF,  the  Government  will  work  towards  making  the  MAF  a 
preferred career of choice that attracts participation from people of various backgrounds. At 
present, efforts are being carried out by the Government to achieve 10 percent of women in 
the  MAF  in  the  near  future  to  realise  Malaysia’s  commitment  towards  United  Nations 
Security Council’s Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security. To encourage female 
participation  in  the  workforce,  the  Government  will  continue  to  provide  necessary 
support  to  women  in  the  MAF.  These  include  ensuring  equal  career  progression 
opportunities, provision of nursing facilities and subsidised childcare services.

Career Development

As  part  of  career  development  and  progression,  the  Government  acknowledges  the 
importance  of  education.  The  development  of  a  highly  professional  military  workforce  is
accomplished  through  the  combination  of  training,  education  and  self-development 
programmes. Priority will be given to the enhancement of technical and managerial expertise. 

10.

11.

12.

13.

57

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

At  present,  there  are  changes  to  the  MAF  personnel  development  efforts  due  to  the 
increasing complexity of operational scenarios and technological advancements which require 
higher technical, analytical and leadership capabilities, in line with the development of smart 
soldiers and national agenda towards a “knowledge-based society”.

The  combination  of  these  factors  has  led  to  the  need  for  different  levels  of  knowledge  and 
skills compared to previous requirements. Realising this, the MAF will continue to embrace the 
concept of Knowledge Force (K-Force) that emphasises acquiring high-quality knowledge and 
cultivating a learning culture in the workforce. The Government will establish an expert pool 
(such as in cyber security) within the defence sector consisting of academics and professionals.

To cultivate professionalism among the MAF’s personnel, the Government will continue to 
engage  and  collaborate  with  prestigious  universities  and  defence  colleges  around  the  world. 
Competent military personnel will be identified to further their studies in relevant fields on 
scholarships  through  the  MAF  Higher  Learning  Education  Scheme  to  enhance  their 
capabilities and competencies in their respective expertise. The MAF continuously encourages 
its personnel to pursue their studies at higher levels.

Based on the challenges of the uncertain security environment, the MAF’s dependence on 
systems and technology is ever increasing. The Government will continue to provide high 
quality training and education for the MAF personnel at all levels for the repurposing of 
individuals and organisations.

The Government will continue to strengthen its military training and education institutions 
through partnerships with accredited academic institutions to provide the best education in 
relevant fields. This is to ensure the MAF personnel are equipped with knowledge and skills 
needed in executing their tasks and responsibilities. 

The National Centre for Defence Studies (Pusat Pengajian Pertahanan Nasional, PUSPAHANAS) 
which  incorporates  the  Malaysian  Armed  Forces  Staff  College  (MAFSC),  Malaysian  Armed 
Forces Defence College (MAFDC), as well as the National Resilience College (NRC) offers a 
variety of programmes in strategic and defence studies. The objective of PUSPAHANAS is to be 
a dynamic centre for research and education in strategic and military affairs through leadership 
development programmes to upgrade the professionalism of the MAF, as well as other relevant 
security and defence stakeholders.

The Government will develop a comprehensive transformation plan for the workforce to realise 
the MAF’s aspiration to become a more knowledgeable and professional force to meet future 
challenges. This plan will improve the MAF’s human resource management aimed at 
repurposing the existing force.

In view of this overall context, the opportunity for promotion would also be an incentive for 
career progression. Therefore, all personnel would be eligible for promotion in accordance 
with  the  due  processes.  Appropriate  recognition  will  also  be  given  to  MAF  personnel  who 
demonstrates excellent performance. 

Retention of  MAF Personnel

The Government is committed to promoting the military as a career of choice with the aim to 
attract new talents and retain the existing highly skilled and talented personnel. In this regard, 
a career in the MAF must be sufficiently attractive to motivate and retain its personnel to serve 
for a longer period of time. 

58

  
  
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Retaining  high  quality  and  experienced  military  personnel  is  a  major  challenge  to  the 
Government as there is a high demand for people with technical, analytical and managerial 
skills in all employment sectors. 

Considering  all  factors,  a  competitive  salary  structure  is  essential  to  retain  the  military 
personnel  as  it  not  only  rewards  their  professionalism  and  experiences,  but  also 
recognises the complexity of the job. Apart from that, other privileges enjoyed by the MAF 
personnel include, but are not limited to:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Allowances, benefits and special incentives;

Medical/healthcare benefits (access to both public and military health systems); and

Housing facilities (provision of military quarters, as well as various housing 
programmes to fulfil the housing needs of MAF personnel). 

Volunteer Forces

The  Volunteer  Forces  consist  of  the  Malaysian  Territorial  Army  (Rejimen  Askar  Wataniah, 
AW), Royal Malaysian Naval Volunteer Reserve (Pasukan Simpanan Sukarela Tentera Laut Diraja 
Malaysia, PSSTLDM) and Royal Malaysian Air Force Volunteer Reserve (Pasukan Simpanan 
Sukarela Tentera Udara Diraja Malaysia, PSSTUDM) are made up of civilians.

The importance of the Volunteer Forces as outlined in the national defence policy, is that they 
would constitute a highly trained and motivated force  that could be deployed during crisis and 
conflict. Thus, the Government will improve their operational capability and capacity to augment 
the Regular Forces.

The Volunteer Forces provide an essential link between the rakyat and military in reducing the 
value gaps between both sides. Through the presence of the Volunteer Forces in the community, 
the noble values of the MAF are shared with the rakyat, hence promoting better civil-military 
relations.

The Government remains committed to strengthening the primary roles and functions of the 
Volunteer Forces, which is to augment or mobilise with the Regular Forces during emergencies 
or war, or when required, and to assist the civil authorities during emergencies and disasters. 

Apart from the existing roles, the Government is dedicated to enhancing the capabilities of the 
Volunteer Forces to mirror those of the Regular Forces in carrying out the following duties as 
defined in the Armed Forces Act 1972 (Act 77):

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Ready to be mobilised and assume responsibility or as replacement to the Regular 
Forces when required;

Assist and provide defences (including Low Level Air Defence or local defence in a 
sector) to important targets and installations, and critical points or zones; and

Implement and provide immediate support in various areas such as reconnaissance, 
access control and anti-colonial activities.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

59

 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

The Volunteer Forces is a conducive platform to inculcate patriotism among the youths. Thus, 
the Government will step up measures to encourage the youths to join the Volunteer Forces 
including to constantly review the allowances structure. Concurrently, additional efforts will be 
undertaken  to  strengthen  patriotism  and  increase  diversity  among  the  Volunteer  Forces 
personnel. 

The management of the Reserve Officer Training Unit (ROTU) will be reviewed to ensure that 
it  is  optimised  to  serve  the  wider  national  interests.  The  Government  will  also  place  more 
emphasis  on  the  quality  of  the  programme  as  well  as  increase  the  number  of 
commissioned ROTU officers serving the Volunteer Forces.

The  Government  is  determined  to  sustain  and  enhance  the  employers’  support  and 
commitment  to  the  Volunteer  Forces.  Among  the  measures  to  be  taken  are  strict
enforcement  and  public  awareness  of  the  1972  Armed  Forces  Act  (Act  77)  concerning 
employers’ responsibilities.1 

The Volunteer Forces currently has expertise in signals and engineering, covering 
telecommunications, ports, water supply, electrical power and railway services. The Government 
will focus on new fields of expertise in specific areas such as satellite engineering, cyber security, 
systems integration, cloud computing and big data to respond to current and future threats. 

The Government will continue to enhance the roles of the Volunteer Forces and RFR to meet 
current requirements. The Volunteer Forces and RFR are no longer considered as assets to be 
solely mobilised during conflicts, instead they are viewed as complementary and integral parts 
of the MAF.

The MAF Veterans

Veterans are brave and resilient individuals who have served in the MAF,  risking their lives 
to  protect  and  defend  national  security  and  sovereignty.  Therefore,  to  honour  the 
veterans  for  their  courage  and  selfless  sacrifices  for  the  nation,  the  Government  will 
continue to support their wellbeing. 

The  main  focus  of  the  Government  is  to  improve  the  veterans’  socio-economic  well-being  
and  assist  them  in  getting  their  next  career  opportunities  .  The  Government  will  provide 
consultation  services  and  transition  training  to  increase  the  marketability  of  veterans. 
The  Government  will  also  continue  current  collaborations  and  explore  wider  career 
opportunities for veterans.

The Government is aware of the importance of providing healthcare and social-related needs 
to  the  veterans.  The  provision  of  healthcare  including  financial  support  for  haemodialysis 
treatment as well as medical treatment, medical equipment and other necessities will remain a 
top priority. 

To ensure that the veterans’ social needs and well-being are taken care of, the Government will 
continue  its  efforts  to  provide  assistance  related  to  the  cost  of  living,  schooling,  tertiary 
education and emergencies. The Government will improve the service delivery system for 
veterans through collaborations with relevant parties. 

39.

At the same time, veterans can continue to play a role in contributing to the society and the 
nation by joining the Volunteer Forces after the completion of the RFR period or by sharing 

1 Section 201B and 201C of the Armed Forces Act 1972 (Act 77) which refers to an employer’s responsibility. 

60

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

their knowledge and expertise with the public and private sectors. The veterans can also play an 
important role in bridging the MAF and society, thus providing a better understanding of the 
military and national defence.

Civil Servants in Defence

Competent  civil  servants  are  the  core  of  MINDEF.  The  civil  servants  have  a  wide  range 
of responsibilities and significant roles in ensuring that the MAF could carry out its tasks in 
defending the nation. Civil servants of various levels are responsible for developing the national 
defence policy and other related defence development plans to achieve the Ministry’s objectives. 
For this purpose, MINDEF’s strategic plan is designed every five years as a base to implement 
the policies that have been developed.  

To ensure the effective management of national defence, it is vital for capable and experienced 
civil servants to be placed in the defence and security cluster. Generally, civil servants can be 
placed in any ministry. However, the defence and security sector is unique. It needs to retain 
civil servants specifically from the Administrative and Diplomatic Service who have specialised 
knowledge  and  skills  on  the  issue-areas  that  have  been  cultivated  over  a  period  of  time. 
Therefore, the Government  is  determined to create a defence and security cluster to sustain 
institutional memory and ensure policy coherence. 

In order to develop expertise within the defence and security cluster as well as to integrate the 
civil service with the MAF, the Government will provide training and courses in the field of 
strategic as well as defence and security studies, in addition to developing and establishing 
Subject Matter Experts through a comprehensive succession plan in the defence and security 
sector. 

The Government will also give priority towards developing skilled civil servants in the fields of 
defence science, technology and industry to conduct R&D in defence related areas.

Civil servants are also exposed to challenging environments, high-intensity tasks and pressures 
while  carrying  out  their  duties  and  responsibilities.  As  such,  the  Government  will  continue 
to  provide  a  conducive  work  ecosystem  and  ensure  their  well-being  is  taken  care  of. 
High-performing  civilian  defence  personnel  will  be  conferred  appropriate  recognitions  and 
awards. 

Participation of  and by the Rakyat

This  DWP  emphasises  defence  as  a  shared  responsibility;  a  comprehensive  collective  action 
that involves not only the whole-of-government but also the whole-of-society across the nation. 
Collaboration between the rakyat and the defence workforce reflects the whole-of-nation 
approach towards strengthening national defence.

Continuous participation of and by the rakyat in activities that raise the public’s awareness 
on the importance of security and defence matters as well as grassroots programmes organised 
by civil society organisations, social groups and individuals, in addition to cooperation with 
defence and security agencies, will contribute directly to national defence.

Comprehensive Defence serves to support the implementation of the HANRUH concept 
or  Total  Defence,  in  terms  of  Security  Readiness.  Other  aspects  of  HANRUH  include 
Social Cohesion, Civil Preparedness, Economic Resilience, and Psychological Resilience.  

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

61

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

This longstanding concept stresses that the responsibility of defending the country is not 
shouldered solely by the MAF and other security forces, but also by all segments of society 
from organisations to individuals. 

48.

49.

Cyber  resilience  is  a  new  element  that  needs  to  be  emphasised  in  the  implementation  of 
HANRUH. While digital development provides new opportunities for Malaysia, it has also led 
to security threats through the cyber electromagnetic domain. In this regard, it is imperative to 
mitigate such security risks by developing cyber resilience efforts across the society.

Security readiness refers to the act and preparation to protect the country, citizens and national 
resources being spearheaded by MINDEF and the MAF. The MAF is also responsible to assist 
local authorities in enforcing the law, providing assistance during natural disasters and 
ensuring public order when required that will indirectly contribute to the nation building 
process. 

50.

The participation of and by the rakyat is important to achieve Comprehensive Defence. To 
achieve this, the consolidation of resources and efforts can be implemented among: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

Civil authorities. Ensuring sufficient and effective infrastructure including 
transportation, logistics, communications and emergency supplies of critical items for 
the survival of the rakyat;

Private sectors. Providing support in terms of services, products and expertise, as well 
as encouraging their employees to join the Volunteer Forces; and

Non-governmental organisations. Support the nation by organising awareness 
campaigns and actively participating in exercises on emergency preparedness.

51.

Comprehensive Defence, based on the shared identity concept, upholds the commitment of the 
DWP to achieve the following objectives: 

i. 

ii. 

Achieving sustainable internal resilience through the whole-of-nation approach;

Improving inter-agency coordination through the whole-of-government approach; 
and

iii. 

Strengthening national unity through the whole-of-society approach.

52.

53.

54.

The Government encourages all parties to be actively involved in raising security awareness and 
patriotism as well as fostering support for national defence through campaigns, promotions 
and advocacy at all levels of society.   

The  Government  is  determined  to  instil  a  security  culture  amongst  the  rakyat  through 
Comprehensive Defence to enhance the nation’s security readiness. The rise and fall of a nation 
is fully dependent on the unity, resilience and robustness of the rakyat in facing current and 
future  threats.  Hence,  the  cultivation  of  a  security  culture  is  important  to  ensure  the 
preservation of national sovereignty. 

Hari Pahlawan (Warrior’s Day) is celebrated to commemorate the noble sacrifices made by our 
national heroes who gave their lives in defending our beloved nation. Thus, appropriate 
recognition shall be given to them for their heroic actions. The rakyat is encouraged to 
empathise and contribute individually, collectively or as an organisation towards the annual 
Hari Pahlawan celebration.

62

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

INTERNATIONAL DEFENCE ENGAGEMENT

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

International defence engagement is an integral element of the DWP. It explores and expands 
Malaysia’s Credible Partnerships, the third pillar of the national defence strategy.

Establishing  and  maintaining  foreign  relations  that  have  been  shaped  through  defence 
cooperation with other countries is a practice and tradition of MINDEF and the MAF. The 
partnerships serve Malaysia’s defence interests by shaping a conducive external environment 
and  security  relations,  boosting  the  nation’s  defence  capacity  building  and  strengthening 
ASEAN centrality for regional stability and prosperity.

This DWP adds a new level of activism and purpose to this traditional role by consolidating 
the existing partnerships while cultivating new ones. It sets forth a direction that continuously 
enhances the credibility of the nation’s defence partnerships. This direction will boost defence 
cooperation transformation towards a more beneficial goal and maximise the nation’s potential 
as a bridging linchpin between the Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. This, in turn, will 
further support other pillars of national defence strategy, namely Concentric Deterrence and 
Comprehensive Defence. 

This  chapter  emphasises  the  National  Defence  Objective  in  achieving  credible  partnerships 
with other countries. It then elaborates on Malaysia’s defence engagement at the bilateral and 
multilateral levels. It also addresses how the nation’s multi-layered defence engagement that 
includes  training,  exercises,  operations  and  other  defence  initiatives  enhances  the  MAF’s 
defence preparedness and regional security. 

Goals of  Credible Partnerships 

The  nation’s  defence  partnerships  are  credible  through  two  approaches.  First,  through 
active participation in various defence activities at regional and international levels. Second, 
by promoting and forging new defence partnerships that provide value to the nation, the 
Southeast Asian region and the broader international community. 

6.

The Government’s goals in promoting a new level of Credible Partnerships are as follows: 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

Shaping Malaysia’s defence relations with other countries;

Managing shared security challenges;

Fostering regional stability in accordance with international laws, conventions, rules 
and norms; 

Enhancing the MAF’s capabilities and defence preparedness; and

Advancing Malaysia’s position and interests in the international arena.

Scope and Levels of  Defence Engagement

7.

To achieve the goals of Credible Partnerships, the Government will continue to work with 
other countries to forge and strengthen defence ties at the strategic, operational and tactical 
levels.  This  will  be  carried  out  through  scheduled  meetings  and  other  existing  mechanisms 
bilaterally  and  multilaterally,  including  the  conduct  of  training,  exercises  and  military 
operations.

64

 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

The Government will further deepen and widen these multi-layered engagements. Bilateralism 
and multilateralism will always go hand in hand. In this regard, bilateral defence cooperation 
will  be  continuously  expanded  and  explored  in  ways  that  complement  effective  multilateral 
mechanisms,  serving  Malaysia’s  national  interests.  ASEAN  and  ASEAN-led  mechanisms 
provide an essential platform for Malaysia to work closely with our neighbours and other 
international partners to address shared security challenges while pursuing common goals. 

Bilateral Defence Engagement

The Government is committed to strengthening bilateral defence partnerships with countries in 
the Southeast Asian neighbourhood, the broader Asian region and the wider world. 

Each bilateral partnership provides further opportunities for enhancing Malaysia’s force 
preparedness,  improving  security  resilience  and  expanding  strategic  space.  The  bilateral 
engagements cover a wide range of activities including institutionalised high-level committees 
on defence cooperation, sharing and exchanging information, defence and security discourse, 
border cooperation, exercises and joint operations, training and capacity building programmes, 
defence industry cooperation, procurement and transfer of military assets, as well as exchanges 
of visits. 

Southeast Asia

The  Southeast  Asian  region  has  always  been  the  main  factor  influencing  Malaysia’s  foreign 
policy. The Government will continue to develop strong, stable and comprehensive defence and 
security relations with all neighbouring countries in Southeast Asia.

Malaysia’s  bilateral  ties  with  Southeast  Asian  countries  have  progressed  and  strengthened 
through two phases. The first phase was during the early decades of its independence when 
the world was still divided along the Cold War ideological lines. During this era, Malaysia’s 
bilateral security cooperation in the region was concentrated on the immediate neighbours, the 
fellow founding member states of ASEAN, namely Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore and 
Thailand. The second phase started after the 1990s when Malaysia gradually developed bilateral 
defence engagements with Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Vietnam. 

The Government is committed to elevating Malaysia’s bilateral defence cooperation with all 
Southeast Asian countries in the future. These bilateral collaborations are significant to 
Malaysia’s defence and security interests as they provide essential channels to jointly combat 
shared security threats, particularly terrorism as well as other transboundary challenges.

Malaysia’s close defence relationship with Brunei, formalised in 1992, is built on the shared 
history,  common  roots  and  culture  as  well  as  geographical  proximity.  Guided  by  the  Joint 
Defence Working Committee (JDWC), the defence relationship has continued to develop at 
the strategic, operational and tactical levels through defence and security discourses, joint 
operations, exercises, training and exchanges of military personnel. Members of the Royal 
Brunei Armed Forces (RBAF) have been embedded in the Malaysian Contingent to the
UNIFIL  since  2008.  Brunei  has  also  joined  the  Malaysian-led  International  Monitoring 
Team  (IMT)  in  Mindanao  since  2004,  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  agreement 
between the Government of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), and 
to provide assistance in the socio-economic development of Mindanao. 

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

65

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

Malaysia’s defence ties with Indonesia, in which both countries share common history, cultural 
roots, land and maritime borders, is long-standing and strong. Bilateral defence relations can        
be traced back to 1972 when the countries initiated the General Border Committee (GBC) to 
govern the implementation of activities along the common borders. The defence cooperation 
has broadened through frequent exchanges of visits and military personnel, combined exercises
and  operations,  joint  military  training  and  participation  in  defence  exhibitions.  The 
mechanisms for sharing and exchanging information between the two countries have increased 
from tactical to strategic level, with countering terrorism and maintaining peace as the main 
focus of this joint effort. The Government aspires to further strengthen the existing 
relationship through a more comprehensive defence cooperation instrument that covers 
various aspects, including the defence industry.

Defence  relations  with  the  Philippines  was  formalised  by  the  signing  of  the  Memorandum 
of  Understanding  (MoU)  on  Defence  Cooperation  in  1994,  which  established  the 
Combined  Committee  on  Defence  Cooperation  (CCDC)  that  oversees  the  defence 
cooperation    ranging  from  military  training  and  exercises,  courses,  exchanges  of  visits 
and  military  personnel,  and  defence  industry  cooperation.  The  two  countries  have  also 
enhanced  cooperation  in  maritime  security,  border  control  and  non-traditional  security 
areas,  especially  through  sharing  and  exchanges  of  intelligence  to  address  the  piracy  and 
militant threats in the east coast of Sabah and the southern Philippines. The establishment 
of  the  Trilateral  Intelligence  Exchange  (INTELEX)  among  Indonesia,  Malaysia  and  the 
Phillipines  in  2017  has  also  provided  a  platform  for  more  active  information  sharing  and 
exchange among the three countries. 

As neighbours who share the same historical roots, Malaysia and Singapore have maintained 
professional and cordial defence relations. Bilateral defence engagement revolves around 
combined training and exercises, exchanges of visits and military personnel, strategic discourse 
and  participation  in  defence  exhibitions.  Defence  relationship  between  both  countries  is 
mainly undertaken under the ambit of FPDA, ADMM and ADMM-Plus.

Based on shared interests in promoting stable borders and common regional interests, Malaysia 
and Thailand have enjoyed a relationship that is based on confidence and trust between the two 
countries. The defence relations with Thailand can be traced back to the establishment of the 
GBC in 1965. The GBC is an annual platform where both sides confer on measures to maintain 
security along their common border. In addition to military training, exercises and operations, 
exchanges of visits and military personnel, the bilateral defence partnership is also featured by 
the conduct of Coordinated Maritime Patrol (CMP) and Joint Border Patrol (JBP) operations. 
The patrol operations aim to combat transnational crimes, such as smuggling activities and 
human trafficking. 

Despite the relatively late starting point compared to other ASEAN countries, Malaysia’s 
defence engagements with Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar and Vietnam have progressed 
steadily since the 1990s. Malaysia will continue to offer training and courses to military 
personnel from these countries in the future. 

Malaysia-Cambodia  defence  cooperation  began  with  the  signing  of  a  Letter  of  Intent  on 
Defence Cooperation in 2015, which spells out, among others, the enhancement of defence 
cooperation through more active military training and exchanges of personnel. Malaysia has 
also signed an MoU with Lao PDR in March 2019 to further improve the existing bilateral 
defence  ties.  Malaysia  and  Myanmar  have  embarked  on  collaboration  through  military 
training  and  exchanges  of  visits.  Malaysia  is  also  exploring  to  enhance  its  defence 
cooperation with Timor-Leste. 

66

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

21.

22.

23.

24.

A  strong  and  comprehensive  relationship  with  Vietnam  is  important  to  Malaysia.  The 
Government will continue to develop defence cooperation with Vietnam, based on the MoU 
on  Defence  Cooperation  that  was  formalised  in  2008.  Both  countries  have  demonstrated  a 
commitment to forge a stronger partnership and elevate it to a strategic level by establishing the 
High-Level Committee (HLC) on Defence Cooperation. Among the major areas of cooperation 
identified  are  strategic  affairs,  military  cooperation,  maritime  security,  defence  industry  and 
non-traditional security. 

The Asian Region

Malaysia is also committed to enhance bilateral defence relations with countries in other parts 
of the Asian region, including East Asia, South Asia and West Asia. 

Malaysia’s relations with China have been shaped by long historical links, tracing back to the 
Malacca Sultanate and the Ming Dynasty in the 15th century. Malaysia was the first ASEAN 
member to establish diplomatic relations with China in 1974. Malaysia played an instrumental 
role in engaging and bringing China into the ASEAN-led dialogue process in the post-Cold 
War  era.  The  MoU  on  defence  cooperation  was  signed  in  2005  and  subsequently  renewed 
in 2016, which translated into increased activities between both countries including military 
training and exercises. Both countries also signed the Framework of Cooperation between the 
Ministry of Defence Malaysia and the State Administration of Science, Technology and 
Industry  for  National  Defence  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  (SASTIND)  on  Joint 
Development and Construction of Littoral Mission Ships for the Royal Malaysian Navy in the 
same year. The upgrading of the bilateral defence relations ties is in line with the introduction 
of the Comprehensive Strategic Partnership (CSP) initiative in October 2013 between Malaysia 
and China. Malaysia and China have established a forum to share and exchange information 
on various security topics. Both countries will continue to promote constructive defence 
cooperation  through  productive  confidence-building  measures  and  elevation  of  the  current 
defence cooperation to the strategic level. 

Malaysia’s  relation  with  Japan  is  strong  and  mutually  beneficial.  Malaysia  welcomes  Japan’s 
active  and  constructive  role  in  regional  affairs  which  includes  defence.  The  first  bilateral 
discussion  on  defence  cooperation  was  held  in  1999.  Malaysia-Japan  defence  engagement 
is  realised  through  continuous  exchanges  of  visits,  training  as  well  as  sharing  and 
exchanges  of information.  In  September  2018,  Malaysia  and  Japan  signed  the  MoU 
on  Defence  Cooperation,  which  encompasses  defence  equipment  and  technologies, 
exchanges of personnel, joint maritime security and disaster relief operations. Both sides also 
inked the Agreement between the Government of Malaysia and the Government of Japan 
Concerning the Transfer of Defence Equipment and Technology in the same year. Japan and 
Malaysia  have  forged  close  cooperation  on  a  wide  array  of  security  aspects,  ranging  from 
HADR, counter-terrorism to PKOs. Based on this strong foundation, the Government will 
continue  to  enhance  bilateral  defence  cooperation  by  exploring  potential  collaboration  in 
capacity  building  in  defence  science  and  technology,  including  education,  research  and 
development, as well as the transfer of defence equipment and technology. 

25.

Malaysia’s defence cooperation with the Republic of Korea takes the forms of procurements, 
training, exchanges of visits as well as sharing and exchanges of information. Malaysia foresees 
prospects with the Republic of Korea in defence capability building in the future. Therefore, 
the two sides have also agreed to bolster cooperation in the field of defence industry formally 
through defence cooperation instruments. 

67

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

Malaysia  enjoys  friendly  defence  ties  with  Bangladesh.  Bilateral  defence  ties  have  been 
strengthened following the operationalisation of Malaysia’s Field Hospital that has provided 
humanitarian assistance to the Rohingya refugees in Cox’s Bazar since 2017. 

Malaysia’s  close  defence  relations  with  India,  formalised  in  1993  is  defined 
through  the  Malaysia-India  Defence  Cooperation  Meeting  (MIDCOM)  that  focuses 
on  defence  activities  at  all  levels  including  defence  science,  technology  and  industry.  This 
cooperation  is  important  as  both  countries  share  similar  defence  assets  that  boosts 
interoperability between both forces. In 2018, Malaysia and India signed an MoU between the 
Government  of  Malaysia  and  the  Government  of  India  on  United  Nations  Peacekeeping 
Cooperation to exchange information and experience in peacekeeping operations. 

Malaysia’s close defence ties  with Pakistan were formally established in 1997 with the signing 
of  MoU  on  Defence  Cooperation.  The  MoU  outlines  a  Joint  Committee  on  Defence 
Cooperation  (JCDC),  which  emphasises  on  bilateral  military  cooperation  as  well  as 
cooperation in the field of defence science, technology and industry. 

In West Asia, Malaysia has maintained strong bilateral defence relations with several countries, 
including Iran, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). The 
Government is exploring the possibility of expanding defence cooperation with other countries 
in the region. 

Malaysia’s  bilateral  defence  engagement  with  Saudi  Arabia  focuses  on  counter-terrorism 
and  extremism,  exchanges  of  personnel  and  capacity  building  in  defence  science, 
technology  and  industry.  Both  countries  formalised  their  cooperation  in  2016 
through  the  MoU  on  Technical  Defence  Industry  Cooperation  and  held  the  first 
Joint  Committee  Meeting  on  Defence  Industry.  The  cooperation  between  Malaysia  and 
the  UAE  started  in  2013  through  an  MoU  on  Defence  Cooperation,  followed  by  the 
second MoU (revised) in 2014. The focus of  cooperation  includes  military  training  that 
involves  all  three  Services,  Malaysian  Peacekeeping  Centre  (MPC)  and  the  MAF’s 
Department  of  Health  Services.  Malaysia  has  been  interacting  with  Iran  since  1993  to  look 
into  potential  areas  of  cooperation  in  defence  science  and  technology.  Malaysia  and  Qatar 
signed  a  Letter  of  Intent  in  2017  to  explore  potential  defence  cooperation  in  the  field  of 
military-to-military activities as well as defence science, technology and industry. 

Malaysia has elevated its defence relations with Turkey to the strategic level and is committed 
to augmenting defence relations, especially on defence science, technology and industry. Since 
Turkey  is  one  of  Malaysia’s  main  partners  in  the  development  of  defence  capabilities,  both 
countries will continue to explore ways of widening defence cooperation between the industry 
players in all domains. To achieve this goal, Malaysia and Turkey will provide a conducive 
environment to encourage collaboration between both countries’ defence industry players.

The Wider World

Beyond  Asia,  Malaysia  has  a  strong  foundation  of  long-standing  defence  partnerships  with 
several extra-regional countries, including Australia, France, New Zealand, Russia, the United 
Kingdom (UK) and the US. These countries have been Malaysia’s defence partners since 
independence until now. Malaysia is committed to strengthening the existing engagements and 
welcoming new ones to support its national interests.

68

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Bilateral defence ties between Malaysia and Australia are robust and long-standing. It started 
with the stationing of Australian troops in Malaya and Borneo that were involved in battles 
during World War II. The Australian Armed Forces helped  to fight against the communist 
terrorists throughout the Malayan Emergency and aided Malaysia during the Konfrontasi. 
The defence partnership between Malaysia and Australia has continued to develop under 
the auspices of the FPDA that started in 1971. At present day, the defence relationship has 
developed further since the signing of the Malaysia-Australia Joint Defence Programme 
(MAJDP) in 1992. 

In 2017, the MAJDP Policy Talks was elevated to the HLC that convenes annually to discuss 
strategic issues. This partnership is strengthened by a wide array of programmes and activities 
that range from military exercises, exchanges of visits and military personnel, PKO training, 
sharing and exchanges of information as well as capacity building, particularly under the 
Defence Cooperation Scholarship Programme (DCSP). This robust relationship was also 
evident in the strong commitment of Australia in the joint search operation for the missing 
flight  MH370  in  2014  in  the  southern  Indian  Ocean.  Australia  will  continue  to  be  an 
important defence partner for Malaysia.

Malaysia  and  France  have  maintained  a  robust  defence  partnership  since  1993,  through  an 
MoU that  covers  military  activities  as  well  as  defence,  science,  technology  and  industry. 
Consequently, the Defence Joint High Strategic Committee (DJHSC) was established as the 
main avenue for bilateral defence and strategic dialogue to formulate, manage and monitor the 
implementation of the bilateral cooperation. France, one of the major suppliers of Malaysia’s 
defence  assets  and  technology,  has  contributed  significantly  to  the  offset  programmes 
particularly in capacity building and the transfer of technology. Both countries have also 
widened  defence  cooperation  on  cyber  security,  counter-terrorism  and  PKOs.  Malaysia  will 
also continue to forge defence relationships with other European nations such as Germany, 
Italy, Norway, Sweden and other countries of interest.

Defence  cooperation  with  New  Zealand  began  in  1971  through  the  FPDA.  The 
relationship  between  both  countries  was  further  strengthened  through  a  bilateral 
arrangement in 1996. The Malaysia-New Zealand Senior Executives’ Meeting (MNZSEM) is 
the  highest  level  of  meeting  overseeing  the  bilateral  defence  cooperation  that  includes 
military training and exercises, exchanges of personnel as well as the sharing and exchanges 
of information. New Zealand also played an important role in the fight against the communist 
terrorists throughout the Malayan Emergency and aided Malaysia during the Konfrontasi. 

Malaysia shares strong defence cooperation with Russia, an important partner in defence 
capability building and defence industry. Based on the strong foundation of the 1999 MoU 
on Defence Cooperation, Defence Industry and Technology, the Government commenced 
bilateral  defence  cooperation  through  the  establishment  of  a  Joint  Intergovernmental 
Commission  on  Cooperation  (JICC)  as  a  platform  to  discuss  cooperation,  especially  in  the 
field of defence industry. In addition, both sides are committed to further explore new fields 
such as cyber security, counter-terrorism, aerospace and capacity building, besides sharing and
exchanges of information. 

The UK played a very important role in shaping Malaysia’s defence system. The UK was 
involved in defending Malaysia during World War II, Malayan Emergency and also Konfrontasi. 
In 1998, both countries signed an MoU on defence cooperation for promoting military 
activities at all levels, capability and capacity building as well as defence science, technology and 
industry. Both countries demonstrated a commitment to a stronger partnership by establishing 
the HLC on Defence Cooperation in 2017 and to widen cooperation, especially in the field of 
cyber security. 

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

69

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

Malaysia’s defence partnership with the US is long-standing and comprehensive. The US has 
been one of Malaysia’s key partners in the economic and defence sectors. Bilateral defence ties
were  institutionalised  in  1984  through  the  establishment  of  the  Bilateral  Training 
and Consultative Group (BITACG) to coordinate military activities between the two countries 
which include training, courses and military exercises. The two countries have also established 
a strategic consultation forum, the Malaysia-US Strategic Talks (MUSST). Among the areas of 
cooperation  are  in  counter-terrorism,  maritime  security,  HADR,  cyber  security,  sharing 
and exchanges of information, defence capability building and defence industry. Currently, 
the defence  relationship  is  empowered  through  the  Building  Partner  Capacity  Program 
(BPC)  which  involves  the  MAF  and  other  security  agencies.  Malaysia  is  committed  to 
strengthening defence cooperation with the US in the future. 

Malaysia has also developed bilateral defence engagements with a number of Pacific countries, 
including Fiji and Papua New Guinea. The Republic of Fiji Armed Forces had served in Malaya 
under the British during the First Emergency. Malaysia will give priority to the development 
of capacity and defence industry as a basis to mould defence cooperation with other countries 
in the future.

Multilateral Defence Engagements

The Government is committed to multilateralism at both regional and global levels. Malaysia 
will continue to give full commitment to multilateral institutions that provide an indispensable 
platform to mitigate power inequality among sovereign states, institutionalise norms, as well as 
protect national interests and uphold Malaysia’s position internationally.

ASEAN and ASEAN-led Mechanisms

A strong and united ASEAN is at the core of Malaysia’s security and defence resilience. This 
solidarity  is  the  foundation  for  ASEAN  centrality  and  the  key  for  Southeast  Asia  to  play  a 
central role in regional affairs. 

The  Government  will  continue  to  embrace  ASEAN  and  all  ASEAN-led  mechanisms  as 
the  critical  platforms  to  pursue  security  and  other  interests,  including  ensuring  regional 
peace, security and stability. These ASEAN-led mechanisms are the ASEAN Regional Forum 
(ARF), ASEAN Plus Three (APT), East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting 
(ADMM) and ADMM-Plus. 

At the ASEAN level, Malaysia together with nine other Southeast Asian neighbours have over 
the decades actively initiated, developed and leveraged on a web of institutionalised cooperative 
mechanisms to achieve common interests and manage shared challenges among them. These 
mechanisms serve a number of functions: forging dialogue and confidence building measures, 
pursuing  collective  actions,  enhancing  capacity  building,  deepening  group  cohesion  and 
managing NTS challenges.    

45.

An example in point is the sharing and exchange of high-level information with all Southeast 
Asian armed forces through the Intelligence Exchange (INTELEX) Seminar and Analyst-to- 
Analyst Exchange (ATAX). 

70

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Decades  of  gradual  but  progressive  institutionalised  cooperation  through  ASEAN  and 
ASEAN-led mechanisms have promoted regular dialogues, strengthened collective diplomatic 
actions,  contributed  to  regional  interdependence  and  to  an  extent,  deepened 
geopolitical affinity among ASEAN Member States (AMS). These relationships mark the efforts to 
strengthen the solidarity among regional countries, as well as fostering the development of an 
ASEAN community. Although ASEAN possesses limited capabilities to solve issues faced by its 
members, nonetheless many important issues, such as the trans-boundary challenges have been 
resolved successfully through the ASEAN platform. 

The ADMM, inaugurated in Kuala Lumpur in May 2006, is the highest defence consultative 
and cooperative mechanism in ASEAN. It promotes mutual trust and confidence through a 
greater understanding of defence and security challenges, as well as enhancement of 
transparency and openness. Additionally, the ADMM Retreat provides an opportunity and 
space  for  ASEAN  Defence  Ministers  to  further  strengthen  and  deepen  ASEAN  Member 
States’ relations and defence cooperation in a cordial manner. On the other hand, the ASEAN 
Chiefs of Defence Forces Meeting (ACDFM) and its related meetings are the mechanisms 
among the militaries of ASEAN Member States to discuss issues of common concern. Among 
the  ASEAN-wide  defence  cooperation  are  the  ASEAN  Militaries  Ready  Group  on  HADR 
(AMRG  on  HADR),  ASEAN  Defence  Industry  Collaboration  (ADIC),  ASEAN  Direct 
Communications  Infrastructure  (ADI)  and  ASEAN  Peacekeeping  Centres  Network  (APCN) 
that  allow  ASEAN  Member  States  to  more  effectively  tackle  common  threats,  in  pursuit  of 
regional peace, stability and prosperity. 

The AMRG on HADR is a Malaysia-led initiative that aims to prepare ASEAN military teams 
for deployment to areas of crises in a quick and coordinated manner. ASEAN fully supports 
the  attachment  of  military  officials  at  the  ASEAN  Coordinating  Centre  for  Humanitarian 
Assistance on Disaster Management (AHA Centre) to coordinate the flow of information and 
the AMRG on HADR team on site. The operationalisation of AMRG on HADR is realised 
through a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) jointly developed by ASEAN Member States, 
its Dialogue Partners and international organisations.   

The ADMM-Plus, inaugurated in Hanoi in October 2010, is a platform for ASEAN and its 
eight Dialogue Partners (Australia, China, India, Japan, New Zealand, Republic of Korea, 
Russia and the US) to strengthen security and defence cooperation. Experts’ Working Groups 
(EWGs) have been established to facilitate areas of practical cooperation which are maritime 
security, counter-terrorism, HADR, PKOs, military medicine, humanitarian mine action and 
cyber security. 

Beyond the ADMM and ADMM-Plus, the Government is also committed to further enhance 
Malaysia’s active participation in other ASEAN-led mechanisms including the ARF processes, 
such  as  the  ARF  Defence  Officials’  Dialogue  (ARF  DOD)  and  the  ARF  Security  Policy 
Conference (ASPC).

Sub-regional Cooperation

Malaysia will continue to play a pivotal role in several security cooperative arrangements that 
are undertaken at the sub-regional level, including the MSP and the TCA. 

The MSP initiative is a mechanism started by Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore in 2004 and 
joined by Thailand in 2006, to counter sea robbery and piracy. The MSP comprises of several 
joint operations, namely the Intelligence Exchange Group (IEG), the Malacca Straits Sea Patrol 
(MSSP), as well as the Eyes in the Sky (EiS). The IEG serves to support the sea and air patrols 

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

71

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

through intelligence and information sharing between the participating countries. The MSSP 
entails  coordinated  maritime  patrols  and  information  sharing  between  ships  and  their 
respective maritime operation centres. The EiS involves the conduct of joint maritime air patrol 
with Combined Mission Patrol Team (CMPT) over the straits to reinforce maritime patrols 
through air surveillance. The collaboration among the littoral states has been a success, as 
evidenced by the decline of piracy and armed robbery incidents in the Malacca Straits since the 
initiative was implemented.

Malaysia remains committed to developing the capabilities and functions of the TCA, an 
initiative to address the common maritime security threats, specifically Kidnap-for-Ransom 
(KFR),  sea  robbery  and  terrorism  incidents  in  the  Sulu  and  Sulawesi  Seas.  Under  the  2016 
Framework on TCA, the three littoral countries, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines agreed 
to establish collaboration on Maritime Command Centres (MCC), Trilateral Maritime Patrol 
(TMP), Trilateral Air Patrol (TAP) and Intelligence Working Group (IWG). Through the TCA, 
the three countries have established a transit corridor for ships and allowed the conduct of 
hot pursuit beyond maritime borders. Malaysia has also placed two forward sea bases, Kapal 
Auxiliary Tun Azizan and Pangkalan Laut Tun Sharifah Rodziah to strengthen the maritime 
defence in the area.

Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA) 

Malaysia remains committed to the FPDA. The consultative mechanism, established in 1971 
which involves Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore and the UK, has contributed 
significantly  to  national  defence.  In  addition  to  improving  the  knowledge,  skills  and 
professionalism of the military personnel, the FPDA has also enhanced the MAF’s defence 
capability  and  preparedness.  The  FPDA  was  founded  to  prepare  for  conventional  warfare
through developing doctrine as well as conducting scheduled military training and exercises 
to  increase  interoperability  among  member  nations.  Currently,  the  FPDA  is  exploring  ways 
to enhance cooperation in the non-traditional sphere such as maritime security, counter 
terrorism, HADR and also cyber security to remain relevant in line with the FPDA’s three main 
principles.1 The Headquarters Integrated Area Defence System (HQIADS), in Butterworth, is 
the permanent operational element of FPDA. Efforts to build confidence building measures for 
the FPDA are currently being intensified through the observers’ programme. 

Contributions and Engagement at the International Level

Malaysia reaffirms its long-standing commitment to further enhance its global involvements 
and contributions towards international peace. Malaysia’s active contributions to international 
PKOs and its participation at the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) as a Non- 
Permanent Member are well recognised. Malaysia has participated in numerous PKOs since 
1960 until today, including a battalion at UNIFIL in Lebanon, as well as Staff and Observers 
in a few countries in Africa. 

Malaysia  will  continue  its  efforts  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  MAF  peacekeeping  troops, 
including improving the interoperability of peacekeepers among nations. Malaysia welcomes 
contributions and opportunities for wider partnerships to further strengthen the role of the 
MPC, the first of its kind, a multi-dimensional PKO training centre in the region. 

53.

54.

55.

56.

1FPDA’s three main principles are: (1) as a defensive arrangement, the FPDA should maintain a non-threatening posture to avoid rousing 
sensitivities; (2) the FPDA should proceed at a pace comfortable to all its members with due cognisance to multilateral, bilateral and 
national sensitivities; and (3) the FPDA should continually develop and evolve to remain relevant.

72

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Malaysia  reaffirms  its  commitment  to  participate  in  missions  led  by  international 
organisations, such as the IMT in Mindanao, The Philippines since 2004. Malaysia has also 
collaborated  with  international  organisations,  especially  on  HADR  missions.  Since  2010, 
Malaysia has partnered with the WFP in hosting the UNHRD at Subang Airbase. The depot, 
the first of such hubs by WFP in Southeast Asia to deliver humanitarian relief items within
48 hours of a crisis, provides storage, logistics support and services to the UN as well as other 
international  humanitarian  agencies  in  the  Asian  region.  This  depot  is  also  home  to  the 
DELSA, a mechanism to deliver humanitarian assistance systematically under the coordination 
of the AHA Centre.

Malaysia is currently working with the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies  (IFRC)  in  the  area  of  HADR.  Besides  that,  Malaysia  is  also  collaborating  with 
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to strengthen the application of 
International Humanitarian Law (IHL).

Malaysia’s first delivery of aid for the Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh was sent in September 
2017, using the RMAF’s A400M aircraft. Malaysia is also operating the MFH in Cox’s Bazar 
on the basis of humanity and the Responsibility to Protect (R2P). A team of 56 medical personnel 
provides  medical  services,  dental  care,  maternity,  plastic  surgery,  intensive  care,  counselling 
and trauma consultation at the MFH. Since March 2018, the MFH has treated approximately 
83,000 cases and operated on 2,300 patients within 18 months of its operation. Through the 
operationalisation of the MFH, Malaysia has received offers and assistance, among others, from 
Brunei Darussalam, Saudi Arabia and the UAE. 

Malaysia remains concerned about humanitarian issues and deeply appreciates the support of 
other nations especially within the ASEAN community concerning HADR. 

Malaysia will continue to play a leading role in promoting more credible partnerships among 
Muslim countries such as Indonesia, Pakistan, Qatar and Turkey, by focusing on defence 
science, technology and industry.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

73

62.

63.

64.

65.

Future Direction of  Defence Engagement

The  international  defence  engagements  discussed  above  constitute  layers  of  Credible 
Partnerships  that  complement  other  national  defence  efforts  while  augmenting  Malaysia’s 
defence  capability  development.  Malaysia  will  also  emphasise  on  the  development  of 
defence  capacity  as  well  as  defence  science,  technology  and  industry  while  embarking  on 
more defence cooperation with other nations in the future.

In  the  context  of  the  Southeast  Asian  region,  Malaysia  will  continue  to  prioritise  defence 
cooperation  with  regional  nations  while  being  more  proactive  in  advancing  Malaysia’s 
leadership  role  in  regional  security  and  defence  issues.  Malaysia  will  also  explore 
defence  cooperation  with  extra-regional 
simultaneously  elevating 
existing  defence  cooperation  to  a  more  enhanced  strategic  partnerships  in  accordance  to 
the Activist Neutrality principle.

states  while 

continue 

exemplary  multi-ethnic 
Malaysia  will 
inclusive,  developed  and  progressive 
country  with  Muslim  majority 
by  developing 
through 
collaboration  in  the  areas  of  common  interest  while  upholding  the  concepts  of 
Rahmatan lil ‘alamin (Mercy to all) and Maqasid Syari’ah (objectives of the syariah). 

to  position 
that 

cooperation  with  other 

stronger  defence 

itself 
is 

countries 

an 

as 

Malaysia’s future defence engagement will be further developed upon needs and comparative 
advantages. That is, all enduring and emerging partnerships would be forged based on 
Malaysia’s  current  and  long-term  security  needs.  Malaysia’s  bridging,  building  and  binding 
roles will continue to strengthen the Credible Partnerships in ways that complement each 
other, achieving the National Defence Vision while contributing to regional stability and 
global peace.

74

  
 
 
PARTICIPATION OF MAF IN UN PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS 
AND OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANISATIONS’ MISSIONS

Iran/Iraq (UNIIMOG) 1988-1991
Iraq/Kuwait (UNIKOM) 1991-2003
Bosnia Herzegovina (UNFROFOR) 1992-1995
Bosnia Herzegovina (UNMIBH) 1995-1996
Bosnia Herzegovina (NATO-IFOR) 1995-1996
Bosnia Herzegovina (NATO-SFOR) 1996-1998
Kosovo (UNMIK) 1999-2007
Lebanon (UNIFIL) 2007-now

Tajikistan (UNMOT) 1994-2000

Afghanistan (MALMED TEAM) 2002
Afghanistan (ISAF-Med) 2011-2014

Nepal (UNMIN) 2007-2011

Bangladesh (Malaysia Field Hospital)
2017-now

Cambodia (UNAMIC) 1991-1992
Cambodia (UNTAC) 1992-1993

Philippines (IMT) 2004-now

Republic Congo (ONOC) 1960-1964
Namibia (UNTAG) 1989-1990
West Sahara (MINURSO) 1991-now
Angola (UNAVEM II) 1991-1995
Angola (UNAVEM III) 1995-1997
Angola (MONUA) 1997-1999
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) 1992-1994
Somalia (UNOSOM II) 1993-1995
Liberia (UNOMIL) 1993-1997
Liberia (UNMIL) 2003-now
Republic of Chad (UNASOG) 1994
Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) 1998-1999
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) 1999-2005
Republic of Congo (MONUSCO) 1999-now
Ethiopia-Eritrea (UNMEE) 2000-2008
Burundi (ONUB) 2004-2006
Sudan (UNMIS) 2005-2011
Darfur, Sudan (UNAMID) 2007-now
South Sudan (UNISFA) 2011-now

Yemen (UNMHA) 2019-now

East Timor (INTERFET) 1999-2002
East Timor (UNTAET) 1999-2002
Timor Leste (UNMISET) 2002-2005
Timor Leste (UNMIT) 2006-2012

Legend

UN PKOs

Other Missions

SECTION 3
IMPLEMENTATION

CHAPTER 7

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

DEFENCE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INDUSTRY

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Defence science, technology and industry form a strategic component of Malaysia’s defence 
ecosystem  to  support  the  three  pillars  of  the  national  defence  strategy.  The  origins  of 
the Malaysian defence science, technology and industry establishment can be traced back to 
the early 1970s. Since then, several Malaysian defence companies have developed capabilities 
that  have  made  them  competitive  players  in  Maintenance,  Repair  and  Overhaul  (MRO). 
This  also  includes  the  manufacturing  and  catering  to  the  supply-chain  requirements  of 
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs).

Despite steady advances in Malaysia’s defence industry, the Government believes that there is 
still significant room for growth and improvement. The Government’s long-term vision in this 
context  is  for  local  players  to  develop  the  capacity  to  design,  test,  develop  and  market 
state-of-the-art weapons and technologies, both for domestic and export markets in line with 
the Aspired Self-Reliance principle. The Government will continue to support the productivity, 
profitability and sustainability of the defence science, technology and industry establishment.

A well-developed defence science, technology and industry will contribute towards economic 
growth by minimising dependency on foreign defence assets, expanding and commercialising 
products  for  civilian  usage,  driving  research  and  innovation  as  well  as  generating  job 
opportunities for the rakyat, especially among the graduates in the related fields.

The DWP presents a new approach towards Malaysia’s defence science, technology and industry 
policy by presenting it as a catalyst for Malaysia’s defence ecosystem and economic growth. 
This approach is the main key towards stimulating the nation’s R&D foundation, synergising 
industrial and inter-agency resilience, as well as strengthening its overall defence capabilities.

The  Government  will  strengthen  existing  initiatives  by  formulating  a  National 
Defence  Industry  Policy  (NDIP)  that  will  serve  as  a  guideline  for  the  development  of  this 
sector.  This  policy  encompasses  strategies  for  enhancing  research  in  defence  science  and 
technology, capacity building and funding to boost the growth of the local defence industry. 

The role and participation of the main defence science, technology and industry players will be 
highlighted in the five key thrusts of the NDIP. The five key thrusts form a policy framework 
aimed  at  cultivating  long-term  favourable  conditions  to  unleash  the  defence  industry’s  full 
potential. 

The  NDIP  will  also  provide  the  requisite  impetus  and  coherent  policy  guidelines  for 
enhancing  the  capacity  of  local  defence  science,  technology  and  industry.  In  addition,  the 
NDIP will contribute towards economic growth in the long run.

The Government will invest in developing the nation’s defence science, technology and 
industry along the following approaches: 

i. 

ii. 

Stimulating research and development. Developing focused capabilities in defence 
science, technology and industry based on R&D across critical technology sectors;

Encouraging economic spillover contributions to the nation. Benefits from 
defence science, technology and industry are anticipated to spillover to other 
economic sectors, thereby serving as one of the drivers for the nation’s economic 
growth; and

78

 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

iii. 

Fulfilling the nation’s defence needs. The defence science, technology and industry 
establishment equips and sustain some of the defence needs, creating a resilient and 
long term cycle  of self-reliance. This role is vital in supporting Malaysia’s pursuit of 
self-reliance on selected niche areas. A vibrant local defence industry is essential for 
the  realisation  of  sustainable  self-reliance  in  producing  critical  assets  and  defence 
equipment. 

Key Contributors of  Defence Science, Technology and Industry   

The primary drivers in this sector are MINDEF, primarily the Science and Technology Research 
Institute for Defence (STRIDE) and the Defence Industry Division (DID), the MAF, as well as 
other related ministries and agencies. 

The industry players in this sector are the well-established local companies, including 
multinational companies related to defence science, technology and industry, small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) and small start-ups that are linked together under the Malaysian 
Industry Council for Defence, Enforcement and Security (MIDES). 

Malaysia’s defence science, technology and industry are also supported by a research 
community with the expertise to design, develop and test assets and equipment for defence and 
security. The community consists of various public and private universities such as the 
National Defence  University  of  Malaysia  (Universiti  Pertahanan  Nasional  Malaysia,  UPNM), 
research institutes and centres, as well as private inventors creating platforms for self-reliance.

The Government’s Support for Defence Science, Technology and Industry

The ability of the MAF to pursue the National Defence Framework requires the full support of  
Malaysia’s defence industry in order to equip and sustain its capabilities during peacetime 
or conflict. The local defence industry must also support other security and enforcement 
agencies involved in national defence. 

Emphasis will be given to self-reliance on selected niche areas including provision of critical 
assets,  equipment  and  services  such  as  basic  combat  equipment  for  the  smart  soldier  of  the 
Future Force (small arms, ammunition, electronic communication systems, bulletproof vests, 
webbings, ballistic helmets, combat dress and rations) and MRO of main assets and equipment 
for the MAF, as well as other related agencies.

The Government acknowledges the challenges faced by industry players in performing R&D. 
Hence, there will be initiatives from the Government to support R&D and innovation costs for 
potential industry players. This includes the Government’s initiatives to assist in promoting 
their  products  to  the  local  and  international  market.  Ultimately,  these  initiatives  are  aimed 
towards achieving self-reliance in the long run.

The defence industry needs to evolve to remain competitive and not solely depend on 
government procurement contracts. Therefore, new initiatives will be implemented to drive the 
industry to be a sustainable economic sector through targeted investments in the nation’s 
defence and security sectors. A dynamic and competitive local defence industry will be a 
catalyst for economic growth. 

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

16.

Given  the  significant  costs  associated  with  defence  procurement,  awarding  procurement 
contracts to the local defence industry will stimulate the domestic economy while minimising 
the outflow of the Ringgit. The defence industry will also be encouraged to take advantage of 
other opportunities available in export markets, for example, developing local capability for 
aircraft MRO to become an aerospace hub in Southeast Asia. It is worth noting that ASEAN 
Member  States  collectively  spend  approximately  USD30  billion  annually  on  their  defence 
requirements.  A  well-developed  Malaysian  defence  science,  technology  and  industry  will 
provide opportunities for Malaysia to tap into the ASEAN market.

Framework for the National Defence Industry Policy (NDIP) 

17.

The NDIP presents the way forward via the following five key thrusts:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

Thrust 1: Human Capital Development. Promoting various initiatives to produce 
experts with the right skills and knowledge in line with the needs of the defence 
industry;

Thrust  2:  Technology  Development.    Providing  funding  for  scientific 
research, application and innovation, acquiring critical technologies to strengthen 
local R&D capabilities and transfer of technology from foreign strategic partners;

Thrust 3: Industrial Development. Implementing new defence asset procurement 
policies  based  on  cost-benefit  analysis  and  economic  indicators;  revitalising 
specific defence sectoral  classification  guidelines;  reviewing  tailored  incentives 
to support local companies to improve industrial competitiveness and developing 
national strategic projects;

Thrust 4: Towards Self-Reliance. Prioritising the products developed and 
manufactured by capable local companies, re-energising Industrial Collaboration 
Programme  (ICP)  with  OEM  as  well  as  benefiting  from  the  know-hows  on  niche
products and markets; and

Thrust 5: Penetrating the Global Market. Encouraging local companies to promote 
their products and eventually penetrate international markets through collaboration 
with  other  Government  agencies  and  the  private  sector,  as  well  as  participation  in 
international defence exhibitions.

18.

The Government’s five thrusts will be operationalised through five initiatives as follows:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

Initiative 1: Enhancing the economic strategic framework for defence science, 
technology and industry, focusing on niche sectors;

Initiative 2: Restructuring organisations related to the defence industry; 

Initiative 3: Establishing a Defence and Security Investment Committee;

Initiative 4: Stimulating R&D and innovation through sustainable funding; and

Initiative 5: Strengthening talent development programmes. 

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Enhancing  the  Economic  Strategic  Framework  for  Defence  Science,  Technology 
and Industry Players and Focusing on Niche Sectors. Malaysia has several established local 
defence  science,  technology  and  industry  players  that  produce    common  user  items  (basic 
soldiering  equipment),  maritime,  automotive,  aerospace,  ICT  and  weaponry.  These 
clusters will be strengthened in order for the industry players to be more capable and emerge 
as renowned suppliers of equipment and services for domestic as well as international markets.

Malaysia’s key defence industry players are encouraged to embrace the latest IR 4.0 technologies 
such as AI, in their products and manufacturing systems to maximise automation, precision 
in manufacturing and cost-savings. This is in line with the requirement of new assets and 
equipment for the MAF, such as unmanned systems and smart weapons.

The key defence industry players are also encouraged to develop multi-user products spanning 
the needs of the military, other government agencies and the commercial sectors. Examples of 
multi-user products are vehicles, ships and boats, computer hardware and software, electronic 
equipment and communication systems.

The Government’s aspiration is for the MAF and security agencies to coordinate assets and 
equipment procurements to achieve a certain level of commonality among the MAF and 
security agencies. Examples of such common assets are patrol boats / ships, small arms 
and ammunitions, helicopters, trucks, communication equipment and computerised systems.

19.

20.

21.

22.

81

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

23.

24.

25.

26.

Efforts  towards  ensuring  the  commonality  of  assets  and  equipment  between  the  MAF  and 
security  agencies    will  enable  integrated  exercises  and  operations  to  be  carried  out  more 
efficiently,  in  which  operational  and  maintenance  costs  are  minimised  due  to  the 
commonalities of components and spare parts. This will assist the local defence industry to achieve 
economies of scale resulting in lower production and procurement cost.

The bulk of the MAF’s basic necessities such as food, medicine, uniforms, rations, office 
furniture,  barracks  and  other  timber  products  are  manufactured  by  numerous  local  SMEs. 
SMEs  are  also  capable  of  contributing  to  the  design  and  building  of  indigenous  cyber 
technology, as well as technology design  and  building  that  includes,  related  software 
and hardware as well as related infrastructure. Through the DWP, the Government will 
continue to support the production and development of local technologies by SMEs to meet
defence and security requirements. 

The Government also recognises that local SMEs have provided crucial support to the primary 
local defence players as part of the supply chain in providing small parts, systems and logistical 
support. Hence, SMEs function as important elements in the defence industry ecosystem.

Although the local defence industry players support national defence by supplying some of its 
key assets, equipment and services, Malaysia will still have to procure certain assets, equipment 
and services from foreign companies. This is because the local defence industry has limited 

82

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

technological capabilities. Therefore, the transfer of technology and knowledge encompassing 
the know-hows and the know-whys will be emphasised to enable industry players to master such 
technologies in the future.

The  transfer  of  technology  and  knowledge  can  be  materialised  through  industrial 
collaboration  programmes  (offset)  when  the  Government  procures  equipment  from 
foreign  countries.  Defence  procurements 
include  various  value-added  elements, 
particularly  the  transfer  of  technology,  skills  and  knowledge  that  benefit  users  and  local 
industry players. These offset programmes can also help SMEs to acquire funding for training 
and education to develop human capital.

Restructuring  Defence  Industry-related  Organisations.  The  Government  will  take  a 
proactive approach to restructure and if necessary, to create new posts or to establish a new 
organisation in order to achieve good governance for the defence industry. This includes 
empowering the existing divisions and agencies in planning and implementing transparent, as 
well as effective work procedures. Among the suggestions being closely considered is 
the establishment of the National Defence Science and Technology Advisory Council.  

The Government will emphasise on the empowerment of defence industry players so as to make 
them  more  independent,  innovative  and  competitive.  Industry  players  will  assist  the 
government  in  providing  inputs  related  to  the  defence  and  security  industry  so  that 
continuous improvements can be made to develop the defence industry as an economic catalyst.

Establishing  a  Defence  Investment  Committee.  The  Government  is  committed  to 
empowering  the  development  of  defence  science,  technology  and  industry  by  establishing  a 
high level committee chaired by the Prime Minister, with members from related ministries and 
agencies. This committee will set policies and make decisions related to procurement of assets, 
particularly  for  high  value  strategic  assets  that  necessitates  a  collective  decision,  taking  into 
account the requirements of the MAF and security agencies. Decisions made at this highest 
level platform will increase assets and equipment commonalities between the MAF and security 
agencies to achieve economies of scale for the defence industry, as well as return on investment 
for the country. Commonalities between the MAF and security agencies will indirectly increase 
the market size and assets maintenance capabilities of local industry players.

The  establishment  of  this  committee  reflects  the  commitment  of  the  Government  to 
enhance  the  development  of  defence  science,  technology  and  industry.  Investment  by 
stakeholders  in  the  defence  and  security  industry  is  vital  to  support  the  implementation  of 
NDIP to achieve self-reliance in selected niche areas and to enhance the defence and security 
industry as an economic catalyst.  

Stimulating  R&D  and  Innovation  through  Sustainable  Funding.  The  Government  is 
cognisant of key defence industry players requiring support to conduct their R&D and 
innovation activities in order to produce defence assets and equipment to fulfil the nation’s 
defence requirements, in line with the Innovation and Integration principle, as well as to 
enhance product marketability locally and internationally.

R&D and innovation in defence science and technology is costly. Therefore, the Government 
will allocate funds for R&D specifically for the development of defence and security assets and 
equipment. The Government will allocate 10% -15% of the total nominal offset value of the 
ICP for that purpose.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

83

34.

35.

36.

37. 

STRIDE, as a department under MINDEF responsible for all defence R&D activities, will 
coordinate all R&D activities in AI, unmanned systems, smart weapons and ammunition, 
radars and sensors, ISTAR, CBRNe, vehicle systems for land, sea and air, as well as defence 
space technology. 

STRIDE will continue to provide technical support and advisory services to the MAF, 
government agencies and the local defence industry. STRIDE will also be the technical agency 
for defence product certification, playing a crucial role in ensuring the MAF and security 
agencies acquire high quality assets. Additional roles for STRIDE include aircraft black box 
analysis and being the technical agency for the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) Act 
2005  and  the  Strategic  Trade  Act  2010.  STRIDE  is  also  the  lead  technical  agency  for  the 
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC). 

Strengthening  Talent  Development  Programmes.  The  Government  acknowledges 
that Malaysia’s defence science, technology and industry requires concerted efforts to harness 
its potential to achieve self-reliance. One of the key aspects is developing human capital 
competent in conducting R&D, as well as designing and inventing technologically advanced 
products of international standards.

In  order  to  empower  defence  science  and  technology,  the  Government  acknowledges  the 
importance of education in producing scientists, technologists and engineers to fulfil the needs 
of the nation’s future defence. This requires a long-term planning with concerted efforts by the 
Government to prioritise defence science and technology fields. 

38.

The Government is highly committed to and strongly supports the development of the 
local defence science, technology and industry to achieve a high level of self-reliance and be a 
catalyst to the nation’s economy.

84

CHAPTER 8

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

TRANSFORMATIONS, GOVERNANCE AND 
FUNDING

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

This  inaugural  DWP  has  provided  an  assessment  of  Malaysia’s  strategic  outlook  and 
articulated  the  National  Defence  Framework.  It  has  also  outlined  the  fundamentals  of  the 
nation’s three-pillar defence strategy, mapping the pathways towards realising Concentric 
Deterrence, Comprehensive Defence and Credible Partnerships in the pursuit of national 
security, sovereignty and prosperity.

This  concluding  chapter  puts  forward  the  three  building  blocks  for  the 
implementation  of  the  DWP  plan.  First,  pursuing  defence  transformations  for 
restructuring  and  institutionalising  a  more  productive  working  relationship  between 
and within the civil service and the MAF. Second, institutionalising good governance that 
ensures defence transformations are executed in phases, in a transparent and accountable manner. 
Third, securing stable defence funding so that the MAF is fully equipped with assets that 
meet current and future challenges. They are the essential enablers for the MAF to acquire the 
capabilities needed to protect Malaysia’s national interests, particularly to defend the nation’s 
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

The three building blocks are aimed at addressing the capability, coordination and resource 
gaps.  The  capability  gap  refers  to  the  differences  between  the  planned  and  current  force 
structure  of  the  MAF.  The  coordination  gap  refers  to  the  challenges  in  configuring 
cohesiveness  and  efficiency  involving  the  civil  servants,  the  MAF  and  other  security 
agencies, in the process of planning and executing defence and security-related policies. The 
coordination gap can be addressed through transformation of the MAF to enhance jointness 
between its Services and related security agencies. As for the resource gap, it refers to the 
financial constraints of renewing and enhancing the MAF’s preparedness.

The effective and concurrent implementation of the three building blocks is the key towards 
ensuring a balanced, sustainable and productive defence ecosystem for Malaysia in the long 
run, in accordance with the Good Governance principle. They serve to maximise legitimacy, 
acceptability and reliability of the DWP. The implementation of the DWP will be carried out 
from 2020 until 2030, with biennial updates on its progress and a mid-term review. 

Defence Transformations

The  implementation  of  defence  transformations  will  be  undertaken  by  2021  through 
a  Defence Investment  National  Plan  (Pelan  Pelaburan  Pertahanan  Negara,  3PN),  being  the 
masterplan consisting of a vision and action plans from three components as follows:

i. 

ii. 

Defence capability transformation;

Defence capacity transformation; and

iii. 

Defence industry transformation.

Defence Capability Transformation

6.

The Future Force described in Chapter 4 highlighted five main characteristics, namely 
jointness, interoperability, technology-based, able to operate simultaneously in two theatres and 

86

 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

mission-orientated. These characteristics are essential towards enabling the MAF to support the 
National Defence Strategy. 

To realise these characteristics, the Government will review the current 4DMAF Strategic 
Development Plan and other relevant documents to be aligned to the DWP. Subsequently, the 
review will include streamlining the Services’ capability development plans, namely the Army 
4nextG, #15to5 and CAP55.

This  capability  transformation  is  not  only  limited  to  enhancing  interoperability  among  the 
MAF but also  across  all  security  agencies.  The  key  objective  for  this  transformation  is  to 
further improve coordination, procurement and information sharing between the military and 
other relevant agencies. The outcome will be registered in the 3PN.

Defence Capacity Transformation

To support the aims laid out in Chapter 4, 5 and 7 in minimising capacity gaps, the 
Government  is  committed  to  review  existing  policies  in  relation  to  human  resource 
and  establishing  a  Defence  Capacity  Blueprint  (Rangka  Tindakan  Kapasiti  Pertahanan, 
RTKP). The focus is on enhancing the effectiveness of the defence workforce, which includes 
personnel in the Regular and Volunteer Forces as well as those in civilian roles in the defence 
and security establishments.

To  maximise  synergy  between  all  three  Services  of  the  MAF  through  the  transformation 
process,  a  Joint  Force  Command  (JFC)  will  be  established  to  further  strengthen 
jointness.  The  development  of  professional  soldiers  will  be  implemented  through  a 
combination  of  training,  education  and  self-development  programmes.  Priority  will  be 
given  to  enhancing  science,  technical  expertise  and  management  towards  creating  smart 
soldiers. 

In appreciation of the veterans’ invaluable contributions and sacrifices, the Government will 
also continue to review the benefits and facilities for the MAF veterans to ensure their 
wellbeing. The Government through this plan will explore new initiatives to further increase 
veterans’ competitiveness in the job market by utilising their experience and skillsets gained 
during their services in the military. This would include employment opportunities in the 
public and private sectors.

The  Government  plans  to  create  a  specialised  cluster  of  defence  and  security  personnel  to 
allow  civilian  officials  and  professionals  to  be  rotated  among  the  core  security  and 
defence agencies to ensure a lasting institutional memory and policy coherence in the defence 
and security cluster.

The  Government  will  identify  efforts  to  encourage  the  rakyat,  particularly  the  youth  to 
participate in national defence through existing mechanisms such as the Volunteer Forces. The 
RTKP will also envisage new initiatives to inculcate patriotism among all Malaysians as it 
forms the foundation in achieving Comprehensive Defence. 

The RTKP will also outline approaches to cultivate talents in defence science, technology and 
industry fields. In this regard, the Government is committed to strengthening the education 
and research ecosystem. This will include working closely with reliable partners to train officers 
in defence-related R&D.

7. 

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

87

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

Defence Industry Transformation 

Chapter  7  expressed  the  Government’s  intention  to  formulate  a  new  approach  in  the  field 
of  defence  science,  technology  and  industry.  For  that,  the  Government  is  committed  to 
strengthening existing initiatives by formulating a Defence National Industry Policy (Dasar 
Industri  Pertahanan  Negara,  DIPN)  that  serves  as  the  policy  framework  and  guidance  for  this 
sector’s  development.  It  will  additionally  encompass  strategies  for  enhancing  defence 
technology and science research, funding and education while cultivating long-term favourable 
conditions to unleash Malaysia’s full potential in this field.

To  drive  the  national  defence 
industry,  the  Government  will  restructure  the 
organisational  framework  to  oversee  the  implementation  of  DIPN  and  to  ensure 
good  governance.  The  restructuring  among  others,  is  aimed  at  empowering  the  existing 
divisions and agencies to plan and implement transparent and effective work procedures. 

The capability, capacity and defence industry transformations, as well as defence partnerships 
discussed in Chapter 6 need to be mutually supporting and strengthening. Hence, the 3PN is 
developed to ensure the successful implementation of defence transformations.

Subsequently, the Government will execute phased defence transformations as specified 
in the following timeline:

Launching of  DWP

DIPN

RTKP

Legend:

12th MP
(1st PHASE)

MAF PLAN REVIEW
Joint capacity 
development plan

13th MP
(2nd PHASE)

FINAL REPORT
Joint capacity 
development plan

Planning Phase

Implementation Phase

*Subject to change

Figure 8.1: Defence Transformation Timeline.

Good Governance

The  Government  pays  serious  attention  to  the  issues  of  good  governance  encompassing 
transparency, integrity and accountability. A holistic monitoring mechanism to oversee the 
defence transformation process is essential, not only to secure support from the rakyat but also to 
ensure  that  there  will  be  proper  supervision  of  the  transformation  and  implementation 
processes.

To ensure the success of the DWP, a Defence Transformation Committee will be established to 
supervise  the  defence  transformation  processes  consisting  of  defence  capability,  defence 
capacity and defence industry. The Committee will also seek to facilitate effective inter-agency 
cooperation  between  MINDEF  and  relevant  agencies  to  ensure  transformations  are 
implemented in a whole-of-government approach. 

88

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

21.

22.

The Government supports the active role of the Parliamentary Special Select Committee on 
Defence and Home Affairs in exercising oversight towards issues related to defence and 
security. Likewise, a Defence Investment Committee chaired by the Honourable Prime Minister 
with representatives from relevant government stakeholders will ensure decisions on defence 
investments are made based on national interests.

The  Government  will  continue  institutionalising  good  governance  through  the  conduct  of 
checks and balances within the Malaysian security and defence sector in line with the principles 
of accountability and transparency, as well as ensuring that security providers are operating 
effectively in accordance with legal and policy frameworks. Overall, the continued process as 
well as regular disclosures on the implementation of the DWP and defence transformations 
will elevate public awareness of defence matters and garner stronger public support for national 
defence transformations.

23.

The Government shall implement the DWP through a holistic oversight mechanism, as follows:

Defence Investment Committee
Chair: Most Honourable Prime Minister

MINDEF Policy Committee
Chair: Honourable Minister of Defence

Defence Transformation Committee
Co-Chair: Sec-Gen and CDF

Figure 8.2: Structure of Defence Transformation Monitoring Committee.

Funding

24.

Securing  a  stable  defence  funding  is  essential  to  bridge  the  resource  gap  and  enhance  the 
MAF’s  overall  preparedness.  In  this  context,  the  Government  is  cognisant  of  the  fact  that 
there  are  competing  demands  on  the  national  budget.  Trimming  the  national  debt 
remains  a  priority  for  the  Government.  Despite  these  obstacles  and  challenges,  the 
need  for  continuous investment is important in ensuring long-term sustainable capability 
development for the MAF. 

25.

The Government intends to achieve the following desired characteristics of defence funding:

i. 

Long-term and stable. Defence spending is inherently long-term. The acquisition 
of defence assets and equipment is capital intensive and takes many years. As such, 
the    process  would  extend  beyond  a  single  Malaysia  Plan.  In  this  context,  stable 
yearly funding will ensure a more efficient defence management. 

89

 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

26.

27.

28.

29.

ii. 

Affordable and sustainable spending. In return for long-term and stable defence 
funding, the Government will continuously ensure that affordable and sustainable 
defence spending is in a transparent and accountable manner. Central agencies and the 
Parliamentary  Special  Select  Committee  on  Defence  and  Home  Affairs  play  an 
important  role  in  ensuring  funding  and  spending  are  in  accordance  with  the 
plans set out in this DWP.  

Stable funding for the defence and security sector will facilitate a long-term, comprehensive  
capability development. Standardisation will enhance the Government procurement process as 
well as increase interoperability and commonality between the MAF and security agencies. This 
will also strengthen the local defence industry as an economic catalyst. A more cost-effective 
and return on investment will ultimately inspire greater confidence among the rakyat towards 
the Government.

The Government is determined to provide a long-term and stable stream of defence funding 
based on the nation’s financial capability to ensure seamless execution and implementation of 
the DWP. 

The Government will continue to adopt proactive measures towards achieving good governance 
in national spending and procurement. In this context, the Ministry of Finance has initiated 
a  review  of  the  process  of  acquisition,  implementation  and  monitoring  of  physical  and 
non-physical  projects,  including  those  at  MINDEF.  Following  the  adoption  of  Zero-Based 
Budgeting mechanism, all expenditure items are subjected to be reviewed and scrutinised 
constantly. 

Summary

To maximise legitimacy, acceptability and reliability of the DWP, all plans will be documented 
for implementation and monitoring. By evaluating the impacts of the changing security 
environment,  the  DWP  has  set  the  direction  for  defence  transformations  to  take  place  over 
the next 10 years to realise the Future Force and its interoperability with other security 
agencies  alongside  enhancing  collaboration  with  the  rakyat.  One  of  the  most  valuable  out-
comes of the DWP is the Government of Malaysia’s commitment to pursue the three pillars of 
strategy, namely Concentric Deterrence, Comprehensive Defence and Credible Partnerships 
in line with the vision of Malaysia as a secure, sovereign and prosperous nation. 

90

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

ABBREVIATIONS

Royal Malaysian Navy #15to5 Transformation Programme
Defence Investment National Plan (Pelan Pelaburan Pertahanan Negara)
Fourth Dimension Malaysian Armed Forces
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting

ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on Disaster Management
Artificial Intelligence
ASEAN Militaries Ready Group on Humanitarian Assistance 
and Disaster Relief
ASEAN Member States
ASEAN Plus Three
ASEAN Regional Forum

#15to5   
3PN 
4D MAF 
ADMM  
ADMM-Plus  ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting-Plus
AHA Centre 
AI 
AMRG on 
  HADR 
AMS 
APT 
ARF 
Army 4nextG  Army for the Next Generation
ASEAN  
AV 
BTWC   
C4ISRT  

Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Armoured Vehicles
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
Command, Control, Communications, Computer, Intelligence, Surveillance, 
Reconnaissance and Targeting
RMAF Capability Development Plan 2055
Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and Explosives
Chief of Defence Force
Cyber Defence Operation Centre
Cyber Electromagnetic Command
Cyber Electromagnetic Activities
Civil-Military Cooperation
Critical National Information Infrastructure
Counter-Insurgency
Disaster Emergency Logistics System for ASEAN
Defence White Paper
East Asia Summit
Electronic and Cyber Warfare Centre
Economic Exclusive Zone
Eyes in the Sky
Electronic Warfare
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
Total Defence (Pertahanan Menyeluruh)
High-Level Committee
Industrial Collaboration Programme
Information and Communication Technology 
International Monitoring Team
Intelligence Exchange
Internet of Things
Fourth Industrial Revolution
Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance
Joint Force Headquarters
Light Combat Aircraft

CAP55   
CBRNe  
CDF 
CDOC   
CEC 
CEMA   
CIMIC  
CNII 
COIN   
DELSA  
DWP 
EAS 
ECWC   
EEZ 
EiS 
EW 
HADR   
HANRUH 
HLC 
ICP 
ICT 
IMT 
INTELEX 
IoT 
IR4.0 
ISTAR   
JF HQ   
LCA 

91

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEFENCE WHITE PAPER

LCS 
LMS 
MAF 
MALE   
MCSS   
MDA 
MFH 
MINDEF 
MMEA  
MoU 
MPA 
MRCA   
MRO 
MRSS 
MSP 
MSSP 
NACSA  
NCO 
NDIP 
NDP 
NGPV   
NSP 
OBUA   
PKO 
R&D 
RKAT   
RMAF   
RMN 
RTKP 
SAR 
SATCOM 
Sec-Gen  
SKRL 
SLOC 
SME (PKS) 
STRIDE 
TCA 
UN 
UNHRD 
UNIFIL  
US 
WFP 
WMD   
ZOPFAN 

Littoral Combat Ship
Littoral Mission Ships
Malaysian Armed Forces
Medium Altitude Long Endurance
Malaysia Cyber Security Strategy
Maritime Domain Awareness
Malaysia Field Hospital
Ministry of Defence
Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency
Memorandum of Understanding
Maritime Patrol Aircraft
Multi Role Combat Aircraft
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul
Multi Role Support Ship
Malacca Straits Patrol
Malacca Straits Sea Patrol
National Cyber Security Agency
Network Centric Operation
National Defence Industry Policy
National Defence Policy
New Generation Patrol Vessels
National Security Policy
Operations in Built-Up Areas
Peacekeeping Operations
Research and Development
Rumah Keluarga Angkatan Tentera
Royal Malaysian Air Force
Royal Malaysian Navy
Strategic Defence Capacity Plan (Rangka Tindakan Kapasiti Pertahanan)
Search and Rescue
Satellite Communication
Secretary General
Singapore-Kunming Rail Link
Sea Lines of Communication
Small and Medium Enterprises (Perusahaan Kecil dan Sederhana)
Science and Technology Research Institute for Defence
Trilateral Cooperative Arrangement
United Nations
United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
United States of America
World Food Programme 
Weapons of Mass Destruction
Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality

92

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Defence

