ADVANCING OU R SMART NATIO N J O UR N EY

CONTENTS

3 

05

Foreword by the Prime Minister

07

Executive Summary

12

Section 1: Why a National AI Strategy? 

16

Section 2: Vision and Approach

24

Section 3: National AI Projects 

40

Section 4: Building the AI Ecosystem

76

Section 5: Working Together 

80

Section 6: What the Experts Say

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNATIONAL ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY4 

5 

FOREWORD

The National AI Strategy is a key step in 
our Smart Nation journey. It spells out our 
plans to deepen our use of AI technologies 
to transform our economy, going beyond 
just adopting technology, to fundamentally 
rethinking business models and making
deep changes to reap productivity gains
and create new areas of growth.

Foreword by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Prime Minister of Singapore

Technological innovation has powered economic 

They power ride hailing platforms like Grab and 

progress since the beginning of human history. 

Uber. They optimise factory production lines. 

Countries and cities that succeeded in exploiting 

They work in the background of our smart-phone 

technology have surged ahead and prospered; 

apps, like Apple’s Siri or Spotify.

those that failed have languished and fallen 

behind. Our present era is no different.

The National AI Strategy is a key step in our 

The emergence of new and disruptive digital 

Smart Nation journey. It spells out our plans to 

technologies is re-ordering social and economic 

deepen our use of AI technologies to transform 

structures, and affecting the geopolitical 

our economy, going beyond just adopting 

landscape. To survive and thrive, Singapore must 

technology, to fundamentally rethinking

build up deep digital technology capabilities. 

business models and making deep changes

This is why we launched the Smart Nation 

to reap productivity gains and create new

movement: to improve lives; to make Singapore 

areas of growth. 

a great place to live, work and play; and to stay 

relevant and competitive as an economy. 

As a small country, Singapore lacks the scale of 

large markets and R&D ecosystems. But we can 

We have made progress. We are building a 

make up for this by building up AI research, and 

trusted, nationwide digital identity system using 

working together cohesively across Government, 

SingPass Mobile. E-payment is becoming more 

industry, and research, to develop and deploy

prevalent, benefiting businesses and consumers. 

AI solutions in key sectors. At the same time,

Government services online are becoming more 

we must also anticipate the social challenges 

citizen and business-centric. At the backend,  

that AI will create, by maintaining public trust 

the Government has been building the basic 

and building capabilities to manage and 

digital infrastructure to share and use data 

govern AI technologies, and guarding against 

securely, and to rapidly build and deploy  

cybersecurity attacks and breaches to data 

digital applications and services. 

privacy. We are confident that we will succeed 

in making Singapore a leading country in AI, and 

But we have much more to do. Technology 

more broadly a Smart Nation for our citizens. 

is constantly evolving. In particular, Artificial 

Intelligence (AI) has progressed dramatically, and 

will become a big part of our lives. For example, 

AI algorithms can pick out tumours from medical 

images more accurately than doctors. 

Lee Hsien Loong

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
6 

7 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Singapore has a unique opportunity to harness digital disruption and propel ourselves onto a new 

growth trajectory to sustain our future national competitiveness and improve the lives of Singaporeans. 

We have made good progress through our Smart Nation movement, and have put in place the data and 

digital infrastructure to accelerate our whole-of-nation drive to transform our Government, economy, 

and society.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) represents the next frontier of technological opportunities. Often, the 

bottleneck to reaping the full benefits of AI is not in the readiness of the technology, but in our ability 

to redesign processes, systems, and regulation to deploy them. Singapore is well-positioned to do this 

at a national scale. We have made significant and early investments into AI research and are recognised 

as a global thought leader in AI ethics and governance. We are a global hub for digital and AI talent, 

with a vibrant tech startup ecosystem and a highly educated workforce that understands the value and 

potential of technology. Most importantly, we are able to bring Government, industry, and researchers 

together to work together on deploying AI solutions to address key national priorities.

Vision

The National AI Strategy is a living document to place Singapore at the forefront in the development 

and deployment of scalable, impactful AI solutions, in sectors of high value and relevance to our 

citizens and businesses. 

•  Singapore will be a global hub for developing, test-bedding, deploying, and scaling AI solutions.

  This includes learning how to govern and manage the impact of AI.

•  Government and businesses will use AI to generate economic gains and improve lives. AI will raise 

the Government’s capability to deliver anticipatory and personalised services, and will also be a 

strong driver of growth in key sectors of Singapore’s economy.

•  Singaporeans will understand AI technologies and the benefits it can bring; our workforce will

  be equipped with the necessary competencies to participate in the AI economy.

To achieve this, we will focus on delivering National AI Projects and strengthening our

AI ecosystem enablers.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
8 

9 

National AI Projects

Building the AI Ecosystem

We will embark on an initial tranche of 5 National AI Projects, to deliver strong social and/or economic 

Our National AI Projects will generate momentum for AI deployment and demonstrate the value of AI. 

impact for Singapore and Singaporeans. These projects will guide investment in AI research, generate 

To enjoy sustained benefits from AI, we will strengthen ecosystem enablers that drive AI innovation

lead demand to anchor talent and capabilities in Singapore, and guide how Singapore builds up its 

and adoption across the economy. Our strategy identifies 5 critical ecosystem enablers:

supporting digital infrastructure. We will continue to identify other high impact National AI Projects

to pursue.

•  Triple Helix Partnership between the Research Community, Industry and Government – enable 

the rapid commercialisation of fundamental AI research and deployment of AI solutions, through 

• 

Intelligent Freight Planning – to optimise the movement of freight to improve productivity

  harnessing stakeholder synergies through collaboration.

for businesses and traffic efficiency.

•  AI Talent and Education – address the shortfall in the quantity and quality of talent across the

•  Seamless and Efficient Municipal Services – to make municipal services more responsive,

  entire range of AI-related job roles.

reliable and timely.

•  Chronic Disease Prediction and Management – to help prevent and better manage chronic diseases.

•  Data Architecture – enable quick and secure access to high-quality, cross-sectoral datasets.

•  Progressive and Trusted Environment – strengthen trust in AI technologies to enable an  

•  Personalised Education through Adaptive Learning and Assessment – to help teachers to better 

  environment for test-bedding, developing, and deploying AI solutions.

  customise and improve the learning experience for every student.

•  Border Clearance Operations – to strengthen border security while improving traveller experience.

  AI discourse and develop the other horizontal enablers.

• 

International Collaboration – work with international partners to shape the international

Working Together

We have established a National AI Office under the Smart Nation and Digital Government Office to

set the national agenda for AI and partner the research community and industry to implement the 

National AI Strategy. The National AI Strategy requires a whole-of-nation effort, and we welcome

ideas and contributions from individuals and companies to help deliver our AI vision for Singapore.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
10 

11 

1

WHY A NATIONAL
AI STRATEGY? 

•  What AI has to offer

•  What we hope to achieve from a National Strategy

•  Why we can succeed

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy12 

13 

What AI has to offer 

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the capability to simulate intelligent, human-like behaviour in computers. 

The theory behind many of today’s AI techniques has been around since the 1980s, but advances in 

computing power have now brought practical applications of AI within reach. 

Machine learning, which includes techniques like neural networks and deep learning, has emerged 

as the primary enabler of this wave of AI progress. Machine learning algorithms improve their ability 

to perform a particular task by learning from data over time. This allows computers to adapt to 

unpredictable situations that defy codification by static rules. Such tasks include steering a car

through traffic, or conversing with a customer to learn what she wants. On occasion, the computer

may even adopt a novel solution not previously conceived by humans. 

Thus, AI is a general purpose technology. It has applicability in any field, ranging from cancer diagnosis 

to urban planning and fraud detection. It also has the potential to offer breakthrough solutions that 

are incomparably better than existing approaches.  

Like the advent of electricity, the potential impact of AI on society, economy, and Government cannot 

be understated. Any nation able to master this technology will be able to create tremendous social

and economic value for its citizens. Societies that cannot adapt will fall behind.   

The rise of applicable, deployable AI represents a golden opportunity for Singapore to open new 

frontiers of growth and transcend our geographical limits. For the nation, AI should transform national-

level planning and significantly raise the quality of public goods like transport, education and 

healthcare. For the economy, AI should augment our workforce to raise productivity, and enable us to 

create valuable products and solutions for the Singapore market and beyond. For our people, AI should 

bring about greater convenience, safety and security, and most importantly, improve their lives.

What we hope to achieve from a National Strategy

First, the strategy identifies areas to focus attention and resources at a national level. Singapore cannot 

be world leading on all fronts, and larger economies will continue to have significant advantages in 

certain fields of AI. We need to be deliberate about choosing where we should build our own world-

class capabilities, and where we should tap on the advances made by others.

Second, the strategy sets out how Government, companies, and researchers can work together to 

realise positive impact from AI. Talent, data, regulation, and effective deployment are key elements 

needed to enable AI applications that serve society. We need a coherent plan that brings these 

elements together, across organisational boundaries.      

Third, the strategy addresses areas where attention is needed to manage change and/or manage new 

forms of risks that arise when AI becomes more pervasive. These include workforce adaptation and

the governance of decision making by machines. By being proactive in tackling these emerging issues, 

we will be better prepared and more confident as a nation to advance AI technologies. 

Why we can succeed

First, we have consistently invested in ICT technologies, beginning with our National Computerisation 

effort in the 1980s. In recent years, we embarked on our Smart Nation journey to use digitalisation 

to transform our Government, economy and society. The build-up of our digital capabilities and 

infrastructure has given us a running start in developing and deploying AI. 

Second, we have already made significant and early investments into AI, both in the public R&D 

ecosystem and the private sector. We are also a leading nation in AI ethics and governance.

This provides a good base from which we can anchor world-leading capabilities in various niches

of excellence and build a progressive and trusted environment for AI innovation.

Third and more broadly, we are a small, advanced country with a highly educated population that 

understands the value and potential of technology. We have the capability to organise and coordinate 

well across public and private institutions, and are able to make practical decisions, as a society,

We need a national strategy to fully harness the benefits of AI. This strategy serves three purposes.

on the adoption of AI for social and economic good.  

These factors should give us a measure of confidence in being able to use AI well to succeed as

a nation, even if we are lacking in the sheer size and scale of other economies.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
14 

15 

2

VISION AND 
APPROACH

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy16 

VISION 

By 2030, Singapore will be a leader in developing and deploying 

scalable, impactful AI solutions, in key sectors of high value and 

relevance to our citizens and businesses. 

Singaporeans will trust the use of AI in their lives. This confidence is borne out of a clear awareness 

of both the benefits and implications of the technology. Our workforce will have the necessary 

competencies to be part of the AI economy, and our engineers and entrepreneurs will innovate

and create new AI solutions for the local and global markets.   

Domestically, our private and public sectors will use AI decisively to generate economic gains and 

improve lives. Internationally, Singapore will be recognised as a global hub in innovating, piloting,

test-bedding, deploying and scaling AI solutions for impact. 

APPROACH  

1. Emphasise deployment

We will work jointly across public, private and research institutions to enable effective deployment of 

AI solutions. The objective of effective deployment will anchor our efforts in R&D, regulatory review, 

and capability development. 

2. Focus on key sectors

We will focus on driving AI deployment in key sectors with high social or economic value for Singapore, 

and for which we can build on existing strengths.

We have identified nine such sectors: Transport & Logistics, Manufacturing, Finance, Safety & Security, 

Cybersecurity, Smart Cities & Estates, Healthcare, Education and Government.

17 

3. Strengthen the AI Deployment Loop

There are three aspects of effective deployment: 

AI Deployment Loop

1. Problem Definition

How well we can identify and 

scope problems in Government, 

industry and society, for which

AI can be put to good use.

3. Scaling

How well we can

productionise and scale

the tested solutions, and 

continuously improve them.

2. Development and Testing

How fast we can design, test, 

and prototype AI algorithms 

to arrive at solutions

to these problems.

These three aspects mutually support one another in a virtuous cycle that we label the

“AI deployment loop”. 

Within each of the nine key sectors, we will identify and initiate impactful use cases to start 

collaborative AI projects. We call these the “National AI Projects”. Through these projects, we intend

to create gains, draw lessons, and progressively tighten the feedback loop between problem definition, 

development/testing and scaling. In this way, we will be able to innovate on AI in cycles that will be 

increasingly shorter.  

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy18 

19 

4. Adopt a human-centric approach

A*STAR’s Human-Centric AI R&D programme 

First and foremost, we will focus on benefits to citizens and businesses, i.e. getting AI to serve human 

Currently, AI systems often do not understand the context and complex nuances of human 

needs, rather than developing the technology for its own sake. This is aligned with our Smart Nation 

interactions; and humans do not fully understand why and how decisions are made by

approach, and our focus on effective deployment in key sectors of high socio-economic value.

AI systems. 

Second, we will be proactive in addressing the risks and governance issues that come with the 

To advance human-centricity and understanding of AI, the Human-Centric AI Programme,

increasing use of AI. In particular, we need to guard against the dilution of our societal and

led by the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), brings together research 

institutional responsibilities and accountabilities towards one another, even as we use AI more 

groups across Singapore to develop AI technologies that learn like humans, understand

frequently to automate, detect, and predict. 

humans, and can explain their inner workings to humans. 

Third, we will build an AI-ready population and workforce. At the societal level, as part of the 

The team has started to create capabilities that enable robots to understand human interactions 

overall promotion of digital literacy, we will raise awareness of AI, so that citizens are prepared for 

such as speech, gestures and touch. The team aims to make robots that can be “taught” by 

technological change, and are engaged in thinking about AI’s benefits and implications for the nation’s 

instruction and demonstration. This will allow robots to work collaboratively with humans 

future. At the workforce level, we will prepare our professionals to adapt to new ways of working,

without the need for specialised infrastructure or dedicated setup. The programme will also 

in which workers are augmented by AI capabilities.   

integrate social sciences, such as psychology and sociology, in the development of AI. This will 

allow AI systems to better understand culture and social norms (especially Asian cultures and 

norms) and human intentions. 

Human-Centric AI Programme

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy20 

21 

STRATEGY   

The National AI Strategy consists of two components: 

National AI Projects

We will progressively identify National AI Projects in key sectors of high social and/or economic impact, 

and apply the AI deployment loop from problem definition to deployment. These projects will guide 

investment in AI research, generate lead demand to anchor talent and capabilities in Singapore,

and guide how Singapore builds up its supporting digital infrastructure. 

In Section 3, we have sketched out a portfolio of 5 National AI Projects in the areas of transport

and logistics, smart cities and estates, healthcare, education and safety and security. Beyond these

five projects, we will continue to identify future projects of similar impact level to pursue within

the key sectors.

AI Ecosystem Enablers

The National AI Projects will generate momentum for AI deployment and demonstrate the value of AI. 

To enjoy sustained benefits from AI, we will strengthen ecosystem enablers that drive AI innovation 

and adoption across the economy. In Section 4, we explain our plans to build up 5 critical ecosystem 

enablers: Triple Helix Partnership, AI Talent and Education, Data Architecture, Progressive and Trusted 

Environment, and International Collaboration.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
22 

23 

3

NATIONAL
AI PROJECTS 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Intelligent Freight Planning

Seamless and Efficient Municipal Services

Chronic Disease Prediction and Management

Personalised Education through Adaptive Learning 

and Assessment

Border Clearance Operations

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
24 

25 

CREATING IMPACT THROUGH
NATIONAL AI PROJECTS

The 5 National AI Projects address key national challenges for 

Singapore in transport and logistics, smart cities and estates, 

healthcare, education, and safety and security. Implementing them 

will require our research institutes, industry, and Government to 

work collectively to develop and deploy AI solutions.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy26 

27 

1.  INTELLIGENT
  FREIGHT PLANNING

Challenge

Objective

How can we optimise the movement 
of freight to improve productivity for 
businesses, and traffic efficiency?   

Seamless and efficient freight 
movement, more productive 
companies and workers.

Moving freight is a complex operation that 

We aim to create a freight movement ecosystem 

Key Benefits

•  Businesses increase revenue through 

improving asset utilisation and job sharing.

• 

In-house transport planners are trained

to use digital solutions to do smarter  

transport planning.

involves many players such as port operators, 

where key parties leverage AI to share 

Intelligent routing and scheduling of trucks. 

•  Truck drivers can be more productive with

freight forwarders, container depot operators, 

information and collaborate in an integrated 

AI could also be deployed to help companies 

less time spent waiting to complete a job.

hauliers and third-party logistics service 

manner, to enable more efficient freight and 

better plan the routing and scheduling of their 

•  Businesses and the public benefit from

providers. Many processes in this sector are 

truck movement across Singapore. 

trucks to our ports and container depots, which 

less traffic congestion and a more efficient 

still highly manual, and use independently-

operated systems that are not connected across 

the different parties in the chain. These result in 

inefficiencies in the transportation process and 

congestion around logistics nodes such as our 

ports and container depots, thus reducing the 

overall productivity of our trucks and drivers. 

Pooling and dynamic assignment of trucking 

jobs. Through the digitalisation of assets and the 

use of AI, jobs could potentially be pooled and 

dynamically assigned to trucks to ensure that 

trips are revenue generating both ways, instead 

of one-way. This would make each truck trip 

more productive, and improve asset utilisation 

and driver productivity for companies. 

will help to reduce waiting times and localised 

  domestic logistics ecosystem.

traffic congestion. This will enable companies to 

improve business margins and strengthen their 

business competitiveness. It will also create 

better and higher value-added jobs for

workers in the industry.

Our First Steps

We will need to strengthen data flows and 

connectivity between parties in the ecosystem, 

to create a foundation upon which to build 

intelligent applications. We will explore building 

Route Planning & Schedule

a common and trusted data exchange platform 

1

2

3

4

2

4

1

3

to facilitate planning and optimisation of

truck trips.

We will focus our initial efforts on piloting and 

AI-enabled planning and modelling for better 

deploying AI applications that facilitate planning 

urban planning. Data collected from the 

ecosystem will also enable Government to 

conduct data-driven policy reviews and do

better urban planning to improve the overall 

efficiency of Singapore’s logistics ecosystem.

and optimisation of truck trips to and from the 

sea gateway. In the longer term, we will scale 

the deployment of intelligent freight planning 

solutions to our air and land gateways.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
28 

29 

2. SEAMLESS AND EFFICIENT
  MUNICIPAL SERVICES

Challenge

How can municipal services be 
delivered to residents in a more 
responsive, reliable and timely 
manner? 

At times, residents might find it challenging to 

provide agencies with sufficient information to 

follow up on their feedback. This lengthens the 

time taken to resolve the more than 1 million 

feedback cases that agencies receive each year. 

Municipal services are an essential part of daily 

There is scope to employ AI to guide residents 

Key Benefits

•  Residents can report municipal issues more 

  efficiently and seamlessly.

•  Resident can enjoy better-maintained estates, 

  and more reliable municipal infrastructure 

  and services without having to report them.

•  Residents will enjoy facilities that will better 

life. From cleaning public spaces to maintaining 

along the feedback process and eventually 

Better-maintained estates. Sensors and 

serve their needs. 

roads and footpaths, 10 Government agencies 

shorten case resolution time. 

and 16 Town Councils work tirelessly to ensure 

that Singapore residents enjoy a high¹ standard 

of municipal services. 

Objective

Several of these services are high-volume and 

resource-intensive. While residents today help 

More responsive, reliable, and timely 
neighbourhood services.

by informing us of municipal issues they face, 

we also need to undertake more pre-emptive 

inspections with the limited workforce we 

have, and better plan our living environment to 

prevent issues from arising in the first place.

AI algorithms can be deployed in the 

neighbourhood, such as in lifts, to alert us to 

would-be faults before they occur, and help 

us pre-emptively address issues to minimise 

inconvenience to residents.

Our First Steps

We will start with an AI-powered chatbot to 

guide residents when they report an issue.

The chatbot will identify the correct agency to 

direct the issue to. It will also prompt residents 

for mandatory case details in real-time, thereby 

minimising the need for agencies to call them 

back for additional case information. 

¹ More than 75% of residents are satisfied with the 

delivery of municipal services (Source: Municipal 

Services Survey 2018, conducted by the Municipal 

Services Office).

Tell us once, just the way you see it. Residents 

can report issues seamlessly, without the need 

to worry about which agency to report their 

feedback to, or how to describe the issue.

An AI-powered chatbot can guide them along 

and get to the heart of the issue. 

Working with residents to improve the living 

environment. AI can help us better understand 

how our residents, their families and the 

community are using various neighbourhood 

facilities. With this knowledge, we can then

work towards the planning and building of 

facilities that best serve residents’ needs.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
30 

31 

3. CHRONIC DISEASE
  PREDICTION AND MANAGEMENT

Challenge

Objective

How can we help prevent and better 
manage chronic diseases such as 
diabetes, high blood pressure and 
high cholesterol, to reduce the risk 
of complications like heart disease, 
stroke and kidney failure?

Many Singaporeans have chronic diseases 

such as diabetes, hypertension and high blood 

cholesterol. They may be unaware that they

Better control over chronic diseases 
such as diabetes, hypertension and 
high blood cholesterol.

PA TIEN T_ 01 93 1

RISK S CORE

4

3

2

1

5

3

2

1

6

3

3

2

6

4

3

2

7

5
5

3
3

1

Key Benefits

•  Singaporeans will enjoy improved health 

  outcomes, and will be empowered to better 

self-manage chronic diseases.

•  Patients at higher risk of complications 

  are identified earlier and provided with more 

intensive management and monitoring in the 

  primary care setting, to reduce the likelihood 

Clinical decision support for primary care 

doctors. AI can be used to support primary 

care doctors and care teams in developing 

personalised care plans that take into account 

  of medical complications.

a patient’s risk profile. As each care team may 

•  Healthcare providers will be more productive 

look after a large number of patients, AI can also 

  and can better help patients control chronic 

have these conditions as the symptoms may

Personalised risk score for chronic diseases.

assist in monitoring the progress of patients, 

  disease conditions.

not be noticeable early on. If not well controlled, 

AI can be used to analyse clinical data, medical 

these diseases can lead to serious complications 

images, health behaviours and genomic data to 

such as heart attack, stroke, kidney failure and

create a personalised risk score for individuals. 

and alert care teams to patients whose progress 

show cause for concern so that timely action

can be taken.

Our First Steps

even death. 

This score can help individuals to take 

appropriate preventive measures as well

as receive earlier and more targeted 

interventions from their care teams. 

We will deploy the Singapore Eye LEsioN Analyser 

(SELENA+), which analyses retinal photographs 

using a Deep Learning System to detect 3 major 

eye conditions: diabetic eye disease, glaucoma 

and age-related macular degeneration. SELENA+ 

can analyse retinal photographs as accurately 

and faster than human graders. This increases 

the productivity of human graders by up to

70 per cent, and allows them to dedicate more 

time to patients with complex cases. SELENA+’s 

capabilities in analysing retinal images will 

also be extended to develop a predictive risk 

assessment model for cardiovascular disease. 

Empower patients to better manage their 

chronic diseases. AI can make it easier for 

patients to self-manage their conditions. 

Patients can use AI to monitor their health 

status, and receive timely reminders to eat 

healthily, increase physical activities, take

their medication and report for check-ups.    

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
32 

33 

4. PERSONALISED EDUCATION THROUGH
  ADAPTIVE LEARNING AND ASSESSMENT

Challenge

Objective

How can we help teachers to better 
customise and improve the learning 
experience for every student, 
particularly those with learning 
difficulties?  

More personalised learning and 
assessment for every student.

We will leverage AI through the Singapore 

Student Learning Space (SLS), an online learning 

platform for all students and teachers in the 

Different students have different learning needs, 

national school system, launched in May 2018.  

starting points and aptitudes for different 

subjects. They also have different strengths 

and interests. There is also a limit to how much 

teachers can customise the learning experience 

or provide continuous and detailed feedback for 

every student. Routine tasks also take up time 

that teachers could use to value-add to students’ 

learning experiences. 

Teachers will be able to assess students’

work more efficiently and effectively with

an AI-enabled Automated Marking System.

The automated marking system will be able to 

assess open-ended student responses such as 

short-answer response questions and essays, 

and provide quick feedback to students’ work.

Students’ learning experiences with the SLS 

will be enhanced by an AI-enabled Adaptive 

Learning System. The adaptive learning system 

will use machine learning to enable it to tell how 

each student responds to learning materials 

and activities, and to recommend a step-by-step 

pathway customised for each learner. 

We will also support students’ holistic 

development through an AI Learning Companion 

that could motivate the student, keeping her 

engaged during challenging tasks, help the 

student reflect on her learning experience,

and recommend further learning activities.

Key Benefits

•  Students will have a more personalised 

learning experience, tailored to their 

individual strengths and weaknesses. 

•  Teachers will spend less time on routine  

  assessment tasks, and can guide students’ 

learning more effectively through data-

  driven insights.

• 

In the long run, students of diverse learning 

  needs, as well as low-progress learners,

  will be better supported, raising their  

  achievement level.

Our First Steps

We will pilot an AI-enabled automated marking 

system for English Language with selected 

primary and secondary schools in 2020.

We will also trial the adaptive learning system 

through the SLS for specific topics in the 

Mathematics curriculum, starting with upper 

primary and lower secondary levels. We will 

conduct a pilot with selected schools by 2022. 

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
34 

35 

5. BORDER CLEARANCE
  OPERATIONS

Challenge

Objective

How do we continue to strengthen 
border security while improving 
traveller experience?  

100% automated immigration 
clearance for all travellers.

The demand for secure and efficient immigration 

clearance is expected to grow amidst the 

heightened security climate and the anticipated 

increase in global travel and commerce. However, 

increasing security often comes at a price; from 

invasive body searches, to long queues

at immigration checkpoints.

Singapore has long been a destination for 

We aim to deploy AI to achieve 100% automated 

business and leisure travel and a popular 

immigration clearance for all travellers, including 

embarkation point for those wanting to explore 

first-time social visitors. Singaporeans and 

the rest of Asia. To maintain Singapore’s image 

departing visitors will experience “Breeze-

as a welcoming and safe tourism and business 

Through” immigration clearance, without

destination, we need to continue to provide 

the need to present their passports.

a fast and hassle-free immigration clearance 

experience for all our travellers, without 

compromising security. This will be especially 

challenging amidst our tightening resident 

labour force and space constraints.

Our First Steps

Singapore will explore using AI to assist 

immigration officers in evaluating the risk 

profile of travellers before they arrive at our 

checkpoints, and to tier the level of security 

screening accordingly. To enable this, we will 

collect and analyse data from various sources, 

including the Singapore Arrival Cards submitted 

by travellers and advance passenger information 

from airlines. We will also study how to redesign 

our immigration clearance process to enable 

all travellers to enjoy secure and seamless 

immigration clearance experience via

automated clearance facilities.

Even though our border security will be 

enhanced, for most travellers, these security 

measures will work quietly in the background, 

enabling them to experience the convenience

of hassle-free international travel.

Key Benefits

•  Singaporeans and visitors will be empowered 

to process their own clearance through the 

  automated immigration facilities, and enjoy a 

faster and more seamless travel experience.

•  Singaporeans will enjoy greater safety

  and security through our strengthened

  border security. 

• 

Immigration officers will achieve productivity 

  gains and can focus on higher value work.  

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
36 

37 

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy38 

39 

4

BUILDING THE
AI ECOSYSTEM

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Triple Helix Partnership between the Research 

Community, Industry and Government

AI Talent and Education

Data Architecture

Progressive and Trusted Environment

International Collaboration

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
40 

41 

THE ECOSYSTEM ENABLERS

Even as Singapore embarks on National AI Projects,

we must build a vibrant and sustainable AI ecosystem

to anchor AI innovation and adoption across the economy.

We have identified five ecosystem enablers:

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy42 

43 

ECOSYSTEM ENABLER 1   

TRIPLE HELIX PARTNERSHIP

– Research Community, Industry and Government   

AI Singapore – Singapore’s national programme for AI   

The research community, industry, and Government play important, interconnected roles to enable the 

development and deployment of AI solutions. It is critical for Singapore to enhance partnerships across 

these stakeholders to strengthen our collective capabilities and drive our overall national AI effort.

Key Thrust 1.1 Deepen investments in AI-related R&D across the
research ecosystem

Singapore has built substantive AI R&D capabilities from our early investments. In 2019, Singapore 

ranked first in the world based on the impact of our AI scientific publications, according to Elsevier 

SciVal. Four of the ten most promising young AI researchers ranked by the Institute of Electrical

and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) in 2018 are based in Singapore.

We have already committed over S$500m for AI-related research, innovation and enterprise activities  

under the RIE2020 Plan, and will invest more going forward. Singapore will build on our strengths

in AI R&D and continue to maintain a portfolio of AI R&D investments. This portfolio balances

(a) game-changing fundamental research; (b) research that enables more widespread adoption of AI 

(e.g., explainable AI, “data-lite” AI, collaborative and human-centered AI, and digital trust technologies); 

and (c) applied research targeted at the needs of the nine key sectors. 

Access to supercomputing infrastructure will also be an important driver of fundamental AI research. 

Over the next 5 years, Singapore will be investing S$200m to upgrade both our supercomputing 

capability and network speed and quality. This will raise our supercomputing resources from 1 petaflop 

to 15-20 petaflops, to support high-end compute performance needs. Specifically for AI, the enhanced 

supercomputing platform will support the development and training of new AI algorithms and models. 

Established by the National Research Foundation in 2017, AI Singapore (AISG) is a national 

programme for AI that brings together Singapore researchers and companies to jointly develop 

innovative AI solutions and grow a pipeline of AI talent for industry. AISG’s work is anchored on

3 key pillars: AI Research, AI Technology, and AI Innovation. 

AI Research aims to build deep AI research capabilities in Singapore, invent the 

next generation of AI techniques/algorithms and position Singapore as a key 

player on the global stage. 

AI Technology seeks to create significant economic and social impact by tackling 

national or global challenges using AI. AISG’s first Grand Challenge, launched in 

June 2018, was in healthcare. 

AI Innovation focuses on accelerating industry’s adoption of AI technology 

through projects and talent development. Its programmes include the

100 Experiments Programme and the AI Apprenticeship Programme.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 

45 

Prof Ong Yew Soon – AI researcher in Singapore

Prof Ong Yew Soon is President’s Chair Professor of Computer Science at the School of Computer 

Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore, and the Chief AI 

Scientist at A*STAR. 

Prof Ong’s contributions have helped propel NTU to be one of the leading computer science and 

engineering departments globally, especially in AI research.² He founded the Data Science and 

Artificial Intelligence Research Centre (DSAIR) at NTU. Prof Ong also established the first cognitive 

& AI corporate lab in Singapore − the S$42.4 million Singtel Cognitive and Artificial Intelligence 

Lab for Enterprises (SCALE@NTU), where he currently serves as Director.

We interviewed him to find out more about his life as an AI researcher:

1.  What made you decide to become an AI researcher?

I did my postgraduate study at the University of Southampton under the BAE-Rolls Royce  

  University Technology Partnership research scholar programme. There, I became really 

curious about which were the most suitable optimisation solvers or algorithms for designing 

different forms of aircraft wing structures. This led to my PhD topic on “Artificial Intelligence 

Technologies in Complex Engineering Design”, which explored and investigated state-of the-

art AI techniques to uncover new insights about optimisation solvers.  

2.  What is something exciting that you are researching now? 

  One of my coolest work has been developing IntelliK, an AI platform that enables creative 

people to develop AI-powered digital games and gamified Apps without any programming 

skills. More broadly, my research interest is now in AI Research for Society, which looks at how 

AI can contribute towards sustainability as well as supporting people with special needs. 

There are five unique cornerstones, or AI.Rs, of AI Research for Society: 

i)  Rationalisability – to interpret and logically explain the workings on deep neural

network models.

ii)  Resilience – to be able to retain high predictive accuracy for AI models even in the

face of adversarial attacks.

² NTU was ranked 1st in Asia for Computer Science and Engineering by the Academic Ranking of World 
Universities, 4th by the US News Global University Ranking and listed as one of the Top 3 universities in

AI research globally by The World University Ranking.

iii)  Reproducibility – to enable others to reproduce the same output from AI models.

iv)  Realism – to introduce a human element into AI.

v)  Responsibility – to build ethics and ethnics into AI and AI for benefiting society. 

3.  What is your favourite part about conducting AI research in Singapore?

First, there are many existing digital systems in Singapore that generate significant amounts 

of data. This provides opportunities for researchers to customise AI algorithms to analyse 

the variety of datasets, develop human-centric AI models, test-bed and optimise them,

so that solutions may be quickly adapted by companies.  

Second, Singapore has also set up tech platforms that bring together a consortia of partners 

from different parts of the value chain where system level integration is required. This allows 

researchers to collaborate with industry on effective implementation of AI systems.

Third, as a small but well-connected digital nation with a heterogeneous population, 

Singapore presents vast opportunities for researchers to leverage our datasets and develop 

algorithms that contribute towards Smart Nation, Healthcare, Finance and Insurance,

and many other areas that are critical for Singapore’s economy and society. 

Prof Ong Yew Soon designed IntelliK to create AI-powered digital games and

gamified Apps without the need to know coding.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 

47 

Key Thrust 1.2 Drive partnerships between the research community
and industry

IMDA-SUTD Partnership in Smart Estates

Research collaborations with industry will enable the research community to sharpen their focus 

Initiative, Infocomm Media Development Authority (IMDA) and the Singapore University of 

on societal/market needs and gain access to relevant data. Industry also benefits from research 

Technology and Design (SUTD) are launching a new research-industry-Government collaboration 

innovations that they can incorporate into their products and services, and from access to the pipeline 

to leverage AI applications to achieve greater effectiveness and efficiency in designing and 

of research talent. Such public-private partnerships can also support the commercialisation of

managing Smart Estates in Singapore and the region.

To support our Built Environment sectoral transformation efforts under the Smart Estates 

AI technologies.

We have made a good start in driving partnerships between research and industry. There are currently 

in estate management, improved urban sustainability, and better planning and design.

more than 15 AI public-private partnerships and joint labs in Singapore. We will continue to attract and 

There are already ongoing trials to use AI to improve estate management:

anchor AI R&D and product teams from leading global and local technology companies in Singapore, 

1.  Energy and utility management, fault detection, and predictive maintenance for

and encourage them to partner with our research institutions and Institutes of Higher Learning to 

  building facilities.

Applications of AI in Smart Estates could provide benefits such as manpower and cost savings

establish joint labs and invest in training programs. 

Singtel-NTU AI Lab 

Singtel has partnered with NTU and the National Research Foundation (NRF) to establish 

the Singtel Cognitive and Artificial Intelligence Lab for Enterprises (SCALE@NTU) to develop 

applications for use in the areas of public safety, smart urban infrastructure, transportation, 

healthcare and manufacturing. Under the collaboration, Singtel’s subsidiary NCS has developed 

next-generation products & platforms to tackle the challenges faced by cities. These include 

innovations in the areas of advanced machine learning and AI algorithms for intelligent 

transport, IoT, robotics, computer vision and audio analytics. 

One key development is in the area of multimodal sensation with vision and speech intelligence 

to understand customer behaviour & emotion and to assist human-machine interaction.

2.  Automated surveillance monitoring and detection of safety and security.

3.  Unmanned retail concept store offering personalised shopping experience.

The IMDA-SUTD partnership will further advance Smart Estates development through

a multi-faceted effort over the next 2 years:

INNOVATION

DATA

TALENT

We will bring together 

We will work with data 

We will support 

estate owners, technology 

owners to pilot AI toolsets 

technology companies co-

providers, and researchers 

through a Data Lake 

developing AI applications 

to co-develop innovative 

for Smart Estates. The 

in Smart Estates to train 

AI applications, with 

Data Lake will facilitate 

fresh or mid-career AI 

co-funding support from 

AI development and 

professionals through a 

IMDA, with the aim of 

experimentation by 

combination of courses 

scaling up deployment 

researchers, students,

and on-the-job training.

Our research and development in deep learning technologies have been applied to robotics and 

locally and overseas.

and AI companies.

IoT capabilities for dynamic optimisation and planning. For the healthcare industry, a potential 

application would include non-invasive tracking and monitoring of patients and their vital 

signs. In the case of Smart Urban Infrastructure industries, the work focuses on applying edge 

intelligence through visual and video analytics for a safer and more effective workplace.

These capabilities have been pursued in various Proof of Concepts to bring across the

benefits to our customers.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy48 

49 

Key Thrust 1.3 Accelerate AI adoption in companies 

AI Makerspace

Companies must develop the organisational capacity to deploy AI solutions if they are to realise the 

full, transformative value that the technology can bring to their businesses. This requires investing in 

digital infrastructure and engineering capabilities, as well as fostering an innovative culture. To assist 

companies in doing so, Singapore will make more resources available for them to adopt AI solutions 

and develop AI-related applications:

• 

Industry digital transformation and AI deployment plans. As part of the SMEs Go Digital programme, 

  SMEs can leverage the sector-specific Industry Digital Plans, which provide a step-by-step guide on 

the digital solutions to adopt at each stage of a company’s growth. The programme aims to curate 

  more AI-enabled solutions to benefit businesses in various industries as they embark on their

  digital transformation journey. 

•  AI Singapore’s 100 Experiments programme. The 100 Experiments (100E) programme supports 

  companies in deploying AI in a co-investment model by providing them with access to talent from  

  AISG’s AI Apprenticeship Programme. AISG has undertaken more than 38 AI projects with company 

  partners, of which 10 have had AI deployed into production.

•  The AI Makerspace is a new national platform developed by AI Singapore to support SMEs and 

start-ups to jumpstart their AI journey. It provides access to resources for AI experimentation such

  as off-the-shelf, pre-built AI solutions (‘Bricks’), curated datasets from industry and Government, 

  cutting-edge AI libraries and tools, and supercomputing resources. AI Makerspace will also aim to 

  grow local companies to be able to deliver these solutions to our SMEs over the next 2−3 years. 

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
50 

51 

•  Accreditation@SGDigital and SG:D Spark programmes help companies identify and engage quality 

  Singapore-based AI solution providers and start-ups. These programmes give buyers the assurance 

  of reliable digital and AI solutions when working with these companies and startups, allowing for

  a more streamlined approach to integrating digital solutions. At the same time, both the 

  Accreditation@SGD and SG:D Spark programmes help grow and scale promising and innovative 

  Singapore-based startups and companies. 

•  Through the Tech Depot on SME Portal, local SMEs can access “Ready-to-Go” AI solutions developed 

  by A*STAR to enhance their productivity and expand their business. Companies can also gain access 

From 100 Experiments to Scaling Startups

Automatic Assessment of Chronic Wounds in Diabetic and Elderly Patients

Chronic wounds are a common clinical problem in hospitals. AI Singapore worked with a local 

start-up, KroniKare, to develop a Computer Vision system on an AI-driven mobile and web 

platform to capture, analyse and diagnose chronic wound conditions. This enables healthcare 

institutions to better triage patients and allocate resources for wound management, resulting

in improved patient outcomes in terms of early detection and faster intervention for major 

to a broader range of AI expertise in A*STAR to grow their own AI capabilities by leveraging A*STAR’s 

wound complications.

  T-UP programme. 

• 

IMDA’s Digital Services Lab provides a suite of tools to help companies develop AI solutions and 

leverage AI technologies. This includes the National Speech Corpus and the Intelligent Sensing 

  Toolbox. This suite of tools, developed to address the needs in the services sectors, is continually 

  being expanded and is made easily accessible for companies through platforms such as the

  AI Makerspace. 

Following the successful Proof of Concept study with AI Singapore, Integrated Health Information 

Systems (IHiS) facilitated the scaling, validation, regulatory approval, and planned deployment 

of Kronikare’s solution. The Health Sciences Authority (HSA) provided scientific and regulatory 

advice and the device underwent HSA’s priority review scheme to obtain regulatory approval.

Kronikare has now deployed its scanner in St Andrew’s Community Hospital and a nursing home 

at Kwong Wai Shiu Hospital. It has also completed operational trials at Changi General Hospital 

with promising results. IHiS continues to work with companies like Kronikare to support the 

integration of the results into the clinical Electronic Medical Record systems.

A nurse can use KroniKare Wound Scanner to

Uploaded data vectors are automatically 

capture an image of the wound for full assessment 

compiled into medical reports for monitoring 

and documentation under 30 seconds at a patient’s 

wound progress and prioritising serious 

bedside.

cases using a tablet.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
52 

53 

DC Frontiers – a local SG:D Accredited AI company

Key Thrust 1.4 Establish AI innovation testbeds

DC Frontiers Pte Ltd is a local SG:D Accredited data analytics and AI technology startup.

Singapore’s regulators will work with companies to facilitate the deployment and testing of new ideas 

Founded in 2011, DC Frontiers offers a suite of corporate intelligence solutions to give 

through AI innovation testbeds. A key initiative is the Punggol Digital District, a living test bed for 

organisations greater visibility over risks.

deploying and integrating new technologies into the everyday lives of citizens. 

Their award-winning Machine Learning technology is known as Handshakes SEER. It utilises 

proprietary Natural Language Processing and Machine Learning to transform voluminous 

amounts of unstructured data into a reliable, contextualised data source for corporations, 

regulators and financial institutions.

SEER technology can be applied to emails, customer feedback, news and more. In fact,

Singapore Press Holdings (SPH) is working with DC Frontiers to tailor content recommendations 

for readers based on their unique consumption habits and personal attributes. Apart from 

improving the reader experience, this has also successfully automated SPH’s content curation 

process, which was previously a manual task.

To date, DC Frontiers has secured S$16 million worth of funds to further drive product 

development efforts, which includes AI research and the expansion of its data coverage

across more parts of ASEAN and Asia – beyond Singapore, Malaysia and Hong Kong.

Punggol Digital District (PDD)

A greenfield project developed and masterplanned by JTC Corporation, PDD offers the 

opportunity to fundamentally review how technology can transform what it means to work, 

learn, live and play in a smart district. It will showcase concepts on future living, and provide 

companies opportunities for test-bedding technologies such as AI.

PDD will house an Open Digital Platform that will integrate various technology verticals including 

facilities management systems, district cooling system, autonomous goods delivery systems, 

and security systems. The data gathered from the platform can be used by companies to test-

bed new innovations and district managers to provide personalised and anticipatory services, 

and deliver energy and manpower savings by optimising operations and resource consumption 

within the district.  

The co-location of the Singapore Institute of Technology (SIT)  and JTC Business Park will 

facilitate close collaboration between the digital industry and academia. 

DC Frontiers’ award-winning AI technology is known as Handshakes SEER. It is not only able to

pick up keywords, but more intelligently − context. This can be applied to news, customer feedback,

emails and more.

Artist’s impression of PDD

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy54 

55 

ECOSYSTEM ENABLER 2   

Key Thrust 2.1 Train more Singaporeans for high-quality AI jobs

AI TALENT AND EDUCATION

Talent is both the foundation of, and critical bottleneck for, realising Singapore’s AI vision. We need

a range of multidisciplinary talent (AI, digital, business domain) to develop and deploy AI solutions

to the key sectors:

•  Research and Development – AI researchers/scientists with relevant industry or corporate

research and development experience;

•  Data Engineering – Data engineers/technicians with experience in using data to continually

  develop and improve AI solutions;

•  Product Development – AI engineers/translators/developers who can design and build

  user-centric products to drive large-scale adoption; and

• 

Implementation – Application developers, infrastructure engineers/developers and systems 

integrators with experience in building and operating large-scale machine learning systems.

Singapore will track the supply and demand of AI talent and manpower to identify shortfalls and guide 

manpower strategy and talent initiatives. We will also make a concerted push to strengthen AI training 

for Singaporeans and attract AI talent to Singapore.  

Singapore will establish more local talent pipelines to increase the quantity and quality of our AI 

workforce in the longer-term. We will do so by creating AI conversion programmes and corporate-

backed AI academies to upskill the latent pool of STEM and digital workers into higher-value

AI-related job roles.

•  Post-graduate Scholarships. The Singapore Government currently works with companies such as 

  Alibaba, Nvidia, Sensetime, and Grab to provide full-time postgraduate students with industry-

relevant training in preparation for R&D roles in industry. We will establish more of such 

  partnerships to train more AI PhDs with industry experience.

•  AI Apprenticeship Programme (AIAP). The AIAP is a full-time 9-month programme by AI Singapore to 

  groom AI engineers for industry. Apprentices will work on real-world industry projects, from scoping 

  problem statements to deploying models. AI Singapore has produced 60 engineers to date, and 

  plans to train up to 500 Singaporean AI engineers over the next 5 years.

•  TechSkills Accelerator (TeSA) offers various programmes to support ICT and non-ICT professionals

to upgrade and acquire new skills for the digital economy. 

  −  TeSA collaborates with companies on job placement programmes, where fresh and mid-level  

  professionals will undergo structured learning courses and on-the-job training to acquire skills 

  and competencies in AI.

  −  To support conversion of non-ICT professionals and upskilling of tech professionals, TeSA 

supports full-time bootcamp or mentorship & coaching opportunities offered by global education 

  providers and established academic institutions.

  −  For tech professionals who aspire to upskill/reskill through short-form training, TeSA also funds 

  professional development courses in AI.

  −  Underpinning these programmes is the Skills Framework for ICT, a reference guide of in-demand 

job roles and their required skills, to help individuals and employers plan career pathways and 

facilitate hiring. The framework will be updated with AI-related skills and job roles.

•  To further help Singaporeans understand the fundamentals and applications of AI, be it in their 

  workplace or daily lives, SkillsFuture Singapore has partnered with major technology partners, to 

  enhance the SkillsFuture for Digital Workplace programme with the inclusion of relevant AI content.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 

57 

Goh Yong Liang – a Grab post-graduate scholar 

Shirlene Liew – an AI Apprentice’s journey

The Grab-NUS AI lab was officially launched on 18 July 2018 to develop and nurture local AI talent. 

A mechanical engineer by training, Shirlene worked on science policy and industry development 

NUS post-doctoral research scientists and PhD students can work with Grab’s data and apply 

in a Government agency after graduation. She first encountered data analytics when she 

their AI expertise to create smart urban transportation solutions for Singapore and Southeast 

furthered her studies in healthcare systems and operations. That was when she became 

Asia. Grab has since successfully recruited 5 AI PhD graduates from the NUS School of computing 

proficient in the programming language R, and also picked up some Python. She took 2 years off 

and Institute of Data Science.

Goh Yong Liang joined Grab in 2019 under the post-graduate scholarship programme. 

to be a full-time mother after the birth of her daughter, and chanced upon the AI apprenticeship 

programme from AI Singapore’s website when she was ready to re-enter the workforce.

Under the AI Apprenticeship Programme, Shirlene had the opportunity to work for a health-tech 

We interviewed him to find out why he chose to pursue an AI PhD.

client and helped to develop models for fraud detection in healthcare images. Although there 

1.  Why are you interested in AI?

were times when she found the AI equations and concepts to be daunting, her personal interest 

  With the increased footfall of digital services, companies are starting to collect more high-

in healthcare, and the supportive learning environment in the apprenticeship programme, 

quality data. AI, to me, is a tool to create standalone digital products, and I hope to acquire 

helped her through the challenges and made her journey a positive experience.

the knowledge to build them.

2.  What made you decide to pursue a PhD in AI, and how does this link to your career 

touch with her peers. She now works as a product manager with a data security AI start-up. 

Shirlene believes that to grow in a field, it is important to be part of a community, and keeps in 

aspirations?

  While working as a data scientist for three and a half years, I was constantly looking for 

avenues to further my technical knowledge. The Grab post-graduate scholarship opportunity 

came up and this felt like a great opportunity to invest my time in work that could have

  major impact. I felt that to effectively lead a technical team, I first have to establish a strong 

foundation in the field, and a PhD offers that opportunity.

3.  Why did you choose an industry post-graduate 

programme instead of an academic PhD programme? 

I chose the industry post-graduate scholarship as it 

allowed me to work on problems that are relevant to 

industry. At the same time, I have always aspired to 

translate research work to tangible products, and the 

programme enabled this.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 

59 

SkillsFuture Singapore partners IBM Singapore to train AI talent 

Key Thrust 2.2 Teach basic computing skills and computational thinking to all

On 4 Oct 2019, SkillsFuture Singapore (SSG) announced a partnership with IBM Singapore

As AI becomes more accessible and prevalent, Singapore will need to develop AI-ready individuals 

to launch a suite of programmes in AI. The programmes will help our workers build deep

who can understand and apply AI in their respective domains. We will layer the teaching of computer 

knowledge and capabilities in AI and boost the implementation of relevant AI solutions

science across all learners’ journeys, with the aim of developing “bilingual individuals” who can 

within local enterprises. 

apply computer science and AI concepts in their respective domains. Students should learn basic 

foundational concepts to spark their interest in AI at an early age. Later on, they should develop

IBM is one of the first major technology partners to deliver industry-led AI training programmes 

basic AI competencies and literacy, and have further opportunities to deep-dive into AI applications 

for Singaporeans. Through this partnership, IBM and SSG aim to train 2,500 Singaporeans in AI 

during higher education.

and emerging skills within the next three years. The focus will be on helping individuals apply 

and contribute to their work-related projects with the most up-to-date AI resources

•  Develop AI-ready graduates. We will encourage our Institutes of Higher Learning to introduce 

and networks.

SSG and IBM have also incorporated AI content into the curriculum of the SkillsFuture for

  domain-specific AI courses, to ensure that our undergraduates understand how to apply AI

to their areas of expertise and are able to leverage AI tools in their work.

Digital Workplace programme. This will help Singaporeans understand the fundamentals

•  AI for Industry. We will train 25,000 professionals in basic AI coding and implementation by 2025.

of AI technology, and how they can apply AI in their workplaces and daily lives.

•  AI for Everyone, AI for Kids and AI for Students. We will scale AI literacy courses to 100,000 adult 

  Singaporeans and school-going children by 2025. 

Key Thrust 2.3 Attract top-tier global AI talent

In addition to grooming our local talent pool, Singapore must remain open to top-tier AI talent

from around the world. These talents will help bring cutting-edge technology to Singapore, develop

our local capabilities by mentoring budding AI researchers and engineers, and grow our global

talent networks. 

•  Tech@SG Programme for Technology Companies. The Economic Development Board (EDB) and 

  Enterprise Singapore (ESG) will pilot a programme with fast-growing technology companies to 

facilitate Employment Pass applications for their core team members, which may include 

  professionals equipped with deep technical skills in frontier areas such as AI. This will help 

  companies tap on skilled global talent to strengthen their tech capabilities and scale quickly.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
60 

61 

•  Private Sector Data Sharing Framework. IMDA has published the Trusted Data Sharing Framework

to guide companies in establishing data sharing partnerships with each other. The Framework 

  articulates the key legal, regulatory, and technical considerations and safeguards that each 

  organisation should take into account, and provides sample legal clauses and templates to

  draft data sharing agreements.

Trusted Data Sharing Framework

ECOSYSTEM ENABLER 3   

DATA ARCHITECTURE

Data is the foundation that anchors AI collaboration between Government, industry, and research. 

Despite Singapore’s small size, we have natural comparative advantages in data. We can leverage our 

unique common identifiers to curate rich, cross-sectoral datasets. Our heterogeneous, multi-ethnic 

population gives us an edge in developing exportable AI solutions in sectors such as healthcare, 

because AI algorithms trained on Singapore’s population could potentially be scalable across Asia.

Singapore’s key value proposition to global companies and talent lies in our ability to provide timely 

and secure access to rich, high quality datasets. We must manage our data as strategic national assets 

and establish an ecosystem to acquire, clean, fuse, and distribute data across the public and private 

sectors. At the same time, we must proactively build institutional capabilities to manage and govern 

data, to protect against cyberattacks, safeguard our citizens’ data privacy, and ensure that data is used 

for the public good. We will continually study industry and global best practices to identify new and 

innovative ways of safeguarding data, while facilitating its effective usage. This will include enhancing 

our policies, legislation, technical safeguards, and organisational structures, as well as keeping abreast 

of and adopting frontier data security technologies. 

We will begin by consolidating the data assets required for each of the National AI Projects, and put in 

place the necessary data sharing frameworks and legislation to enable companies to share and exploit 

data securely.

Key Thrust 3.1 Establish frameworks for public-private data collaboration

We will enhance our regulatory and policy frameworks to provide greater clarity on the scope, 

governance, and technical safeguards for data sharing across the public and private sectors.

This will encourage organisations to share and use data more pervasively for legitimate use cases,

and help anchor public-private data collaboration and innovation. 

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
62 

63 

•  Public-Private Data Sharing Framework. As the nation’s custodian of personal and administrative 

  data, the Government holds a data resource that many companies find valuable. The Government 

  can help drive cross-sectoral data sharing and innovation by curating, cleaning, and providing 

the private sector with access to Government datasets. The envisaged Public-Private Data Sharing 

  Framework will facilitate the sharing of Government data with non-Government entities (NGEs) and 

  key commercial partners, by defining the scope, type, granularity, and safeguards (people, process, 

  and technical) of Government data that can be shared with the private sector. As a start, we will work 

  closely with the domain agency leads to develop this Framework to support the implementation of 

the National AI Projects. We will develop a similar framework for NGEs and companies to share

  data with Government agencies.

Key Thrust 3.2 Establish trusted data intermediaries for public-private
data exchange 

The Government will identify organisations to serve as trusted data intermediaries for data fusion and 

distribution. These trusted entities could be situated in either the private or public sector, depending 

on the sector, type of data, and where the majority of data are sited. 

•  Define and promulgate common data standards to ensure data interoperability. To facilitate data 

fusion, the Government will work with companies in key sectors to define and promulgate a set of 

  common data standards for the sector (e.g. standards for health records across restructured 

  hospitals, private GPs and research institutes).  

•  Curate and publish a meta-data catalogue of public-private datasets required to implement the 

  National AI Projects. We will also work with the trusted data intermediaries to define common data 

standard and technical safeguards to anonymise, secure, and provide companies and researchers 

  with access to these data. This will help facilitate data discovery and anchor data and AI 

  collaboration between Government agencies, industry, and researchers.

Government Data Architecture (GDA)

In June 2018, Singapore’s Smart Nation and Digital Government Office launched a Government 

Data Strategy that sets out action plans to manage data as a strategic asset and deepen the 

Government’s use of data by 2023. 

The GDA is a key thrust of the Government Data Strategy, and aims to enable secure data sharing 

between Government agencies within 7 working days. It is centred on the Government putting in 

place the organisational structures, technical systems, and processes and capabilities to manage 

and use data across its lifecycle, from problem statement definition to exploitation.

The Government has done a stocktake of its data assets and identified an initial tranche of core 

datasets that are highly relevant for policy, planning, operations, and service delivery. It has 

established common definitions and standards and assigned agencies to serve as Single Sources 

of Truth to maintain, clean, and distribute these core Government datasets. It has also organised 

these core data assets around four Trusted Centres (Individuals, Businesses, Geospatial, and 

Sensors), which are tasked with fusing and distributing these datasets. In addition, it has built

central digital infrastructure for public officers to securely use data and protect the identity

of individuals while leveraging analytics to improve policies and services. Vault.Gov.SG is a

one-stop shopping portal for discovering and requesting access to core Government datasets, 

and Analytics.Gov.SG provides a secure virtual environment with commonly-used tools for

data analytics. 

The GDA will be operationalised in phases, beginning from Oct 2019. At the same time, we are 

also preparing for the future, to extend the use of data as a strategic asset at the national level 

and to apply digital technologies such as AI to enrich the value of our data assets.

Overview of Government Data Architecture

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
64 

65 

ECOSYSTEM ENABLER 4 

PROGRESSIVE AND
TRUSTED ENVIRONMENT

Singapore will also apply multidisciplinary and human-centered approaches to study the systemic 

risks and long-term impact of AI, and develop potential solutions to address them. Risk assessment 

in AI development should not be narrowly confined to the engineering disciplines, but also include 

sociologists, ethicists, economists, lawyers and policy makers. Today, Singapore’s universities are 

actively studying the societal implications of AI, and we will tap on their expertise.  

•  The Singapore Management University’s Centre for AI and Data Governance will explore potential 

  options to address longer-term issues as AI becomes more pervasive.

Singapore’s governance and regulatory regime must strike the right balance between fostering 

technology and business innovation, while safeguarding citizens’ interests.

•  The Singapore University of Technology and Design’s Lee Kuan Yew Centre for Innovative Cities

is collaborating with local think-tank Live with AI and AI company DataRobot to research AI’s

Key Thrust 4.1 Establish citizens’ trust on the responsible use of AI  

impact on jobs. 

Singapore has established an industry-led Advisory Council on the Ethical Use of AI and Data.

Singapore’s balanced approach to AI ethics and governance has attracted international attention. 

The Council advises the Government on issues arising from the commercial deployment of AI that

Singapore has been invited to take part in influential international fora such as the Organisation for 

may require policy or regulatory attention, and industry on the responsible development and 

Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Expert Group on AI and the European Commission’s  

deployment of AI. 

High-Level Expert Group on AI. In April 2019, Singapore’s work on AI Governance and Ethics won the

top award at the prestigious World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) Prizes in the category

In January 2019, Singapore published Asia’s first Model AI Governance Framework that provides

of “Ethical Dimensions of the Information Society”. In November 2019, Singapore was invited to

detailed and readily implementable guidance to private sector organisations to address key ethical

present its human-centric approach to AI at the Paris Peace Forum. 

and governance issues when deploying AI solutions. 

As AI developments move beyond the confines of a research lab into our daily life, Singapore must 

guide and shape how AI will interact with citizens, institutions and society. We will:

•  develop sector-specific AI governance frameworks, including codes of practice and professional 

  codes of conduct for different sectors and application contexts;

•  curate technical solutions that enable explainable AI that industry can use to augment their

  AI models;

•  develop training and certification in AI ethics and governance for professionals managing AI 

solutions and implementing AI projects, which will be overseen by Singapore Computer Society’s 

  newly formed AI Ethics and Governance Steering Committee; and

•  publish assessment guides for organisations to assess the alignment of their AI governance 

  processes with the Model AI Governance Framework.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
66 

67 

Veritas – an implementation framework for AI governance in the
finance sector

SMU’s Centre for AI and Data Governance 

Artificial Intelligence and Data Analytics (AIDA) driven decisions, without proper governance

University (SMU) School of Law in 2018 with funding for S$4.5m over five years. It complements 

and accountability structures, may potentially erode the fabric of financial services. For these 

other technical R&D initiatives in Singapore and aims to achieve the following:  

reasons, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) worked with the financial industry to

co-create a set of principles to guide the responsible use of AIDA in financial services.

1.  Promote cutting edge thinking and practices in AI and data policies and regulations;

Centred around trust, the principles consist of four key pillars – Fairness, Ethics, Accountability 

2.  Inform AI and data policy and regulation formulation in Singapore through research 

and Transparency (FEAT) and were released in 2018. The principles have established a standard 

  publications and stakeholder engagement activities; and

across the financial sector in Singapore and various jurisdictions have adopted similar principles 

3.  Establish Singapore as the global thought leader in AI and data policies and regulations.

The Research Programme on Governance of AI and Data Use was setup at Singapore Management 

to guide the adoption of AIDA.

Nevertheless, the practical implementation of the FEAT principles remains challenging for the 

1.  AI & Society: Understand issues that bear on most members of the public, such as attitudes 

industry. This is to be expected – translating philosophical concepts into mathematical and 

towards AI and data protection.

scientific language is a daunting exercise. These challenges have curtailed the adoption of

2.  AI & Business: Examine issues relevant to the corporate sector as a whole, such as

AIDA in the industry. To overcome these challenges and accelerate AIDA adoption in the

intellectual property and trade.

financial industry, MAS is collaborating with multiple parties to create a standardised

3.  AI in Specific Industries: Focus on three specific domains, namely autonomous vehicles, 

modular implementation framework of the FEAT principles, called Veritas. 

  dispute resolution, and the financial industry.

The research agenda for the initial 5 years includes:

We envisage that Veritas will comprise tools for institutions to validate their models against the 

IMDA supports the Research Programme by engaging local and international stakeholders

FEAT principles. Veritas will be applicable to different business lines, different principles as well 

to partner the Centre to conduct industry-relevant research on AI ethics and governance.

as differing regulatory and legal regimes. The goal is to produce the world’s first framework that 

financial institutions can use to evaluate their governance of AIDA.

On 24 September 2018, Singapore Management University launched the Centre for AI and

Data Governance (CAIDG). Front L-R: Prof Goh Yihan, Prof Lily Kong, SMS Janil Puthucheary,

Mr Yeong Zee Kin

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
68 

69 

Live with AI, SUTD Lee Kuan Yew Centre for Innovative Cities and 
DataRobot’s joint research on AI and work

Key Thrust 4.2 Provide a top-class IP regime and accelerated patent initiatives 
for AI

INTRODUCTION TO LIVE WITH AI 

AI companies seeking to grow and expand internationally will need to develop a clear intangible asset 

Live with AI is a non-profit foundation based in Singapore, which believes that AI will impact

(IA) and intellectual property (IP) strategy. To support companies, the Intellectual Property Office of 

our society positively and contribute to accelerating human development. The foundation 

Singapore (IPOS) has launched a new enterprise engagement arm, IPOS International, to provide

gathers thought leaders, decision-makers, and international researchers to lead working

them with customised IA solutions and programmes.

groups and research projects. Its 2019 report covers 3 pillars: (i) AI & Work; (ii) AI & Healthcare; 

and (iii) AI & Society.

AI & WORK

We will review Singapore’s IP legislation to ensure that our laws support the development and 

commercialisation of new AI technologies. Having clear legislation will provide certainty for AI 

innovators in commercialising new products and services.  

In 2019 the Live with AI community, in partnership with the Lee Kuan Yew Centre for Innovative 

Cities and DataRobot, researched the impact AI has on multiple tasks within jobs, in order to 

IPOS has also introduced the Accelerated Initiative for Artificial Intelligence (AI²), the world’s fastest 

better understand the workforce disruption and potential scenarios which may happen

patent-acceleration programme³ that grants applicants an AI patent within six months. A new ASPEC-

in different industries. The findings were as follows:

1.  AI won’t simply replace Humans  

  The AI revolution will not only create jobs for computer specialists. Thanks to the principle

  of comparative advantage, AI-enhanced human roles will emerge as well. 

2.  AI and Work: Equal to the Task 

  AI disrupts jobs task by task and not job by job. All workers can take advantage of this

to disrupt disruption. We can use tasks to better track technology impact, chart clearer  

  pathways between jobs, and improve work prospects for people. 

3.  How to Work with AI: Strengthening your

Strengthen Your Human Skills

  Human Skills  

  To get prepared for the AI revolution,

  employees must focus on enhancing

their innately human skills. 

4.  Automation Needs You to Think More about

  Humans, Not Less

  Taking into account the “human cause” in an

  automation journey means augmenting a task

that satisfies the worker, not replacing it.

AIM (Acceleration for Industry 4.0 Infrastructure and Manufacturing) initiative by the ASEAN IP offices 

also allows applicants to fast-track patent applications for key emerging technologies in the region.

³ Average pendency times between first office action and final decision range between 9.2mths to 95.1mth.

Source: WIPO World Intellectual Property Indicators 2018

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
70 

71 

Alibaba granted AI patent within three months

ECOSYSTEM ENABLER 5

In June 2019, IPOS received an application for an AI invention by Alibaba Group Holdings Limited 

(Alibaba) via its online application portal (IP2SG), which included a separate application for 

eligibility under the AI² scheme. The application fulfilled the requisite conditions under the 

scheme and was eligible for fast-track examination. The assigned patent examiner conducted 

extensive global searches to ensure the patentability of the AI invention. Given the well-drafted 

patent specification, the examiner was able to issue a positive search and examination report, 

subsequently leading to the expedited grant of the patent within three months.

Complementing Singapore’s efforts in supporting enterprises to accelerate their go-to-market 

strategy, Dr Benjamin Bai, Vice President and Chief IP Counsel of Ant Financial, Alibaba said: 

“Companies looking to implement AI solutions globally have grown exponentially. Against this 

backdrop, the speed at which a patent can be granted is critical. Singapore plays a pivotal role

as it facilitates our entry into markets of our interest rapidly. We applaud the efficiency and 

speed of Singapore’s IP office, and look forward to filing more patent applications in Singapore 

under this initiative.”

INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION

International collaboration is essential for driving sustainable development of AI. Singapore has 

a meaningful role to play to support this global effort. We will continue to be an open and neutral 

platform where international researchers and businesses can work together.  

Key Thrust 5.1 Contribute to global standards for AI-related policies
and guidelines

Singapore will strive to be a useful contributor and thought leader in setting AI-related policies and 

standards. We will collaborate with influential industry advocates to apply these principles in industry, 

and work closely with key international organisations and standard-setting organisations such as the 

World Economic Forum (WEF), the OECD, the International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO),

and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) to participate in the standards setting and 

norm-shaping processes actively. 

Ms Sharmaine Wu, Director, Registries of Patents, Designs and Plant Varieties,

IPOS presents the patent grant certificate to Dr Benjamin Bai, Vice President and

Chief IP Counsel, Ant Financial, Alibaba.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy72 

73 

Collaboration with the WEF on the Model AI Governance Framework

Key Thrust 5.2 Collaborate on multi-national AI projects

Singapore collaborated with the WEF Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution (C4IR) to 

Many AI projects during their testing phase will need to test their products internationally for 

enhance the Model AI Governance Framework and to promote its adoption. To this end,

external validation; Singapore can play a role in bringing together an international network

the C4IR has been conducting industry workshops in San Francisco to solicit input, feedback,

of multi-site test beds for AI solutions, starting with the 5 National AI Projects. 

and obtain use cases from companies within its network. 

The output of these workshops will be incorporated into the Model AI Governance Framework

to provide organisations implementing AI solutions useful examples and practices on 

responsible use of AI.

Model AI Governance workshop conducted in San Francisco with 40+ CTOs

and tech leaders from around the world on 1 August 2019 in collaboration with

World Economic Forum Centre for the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

International Collaboration in AI research by AI Singapore

AI Singapore has established ties with many countries to catalyse joint AI research pursuits. 

An example is the AI partnership between Singapore and France, which aims to advance 

innovation and research in areas of mutual interest to achieve world-class scientific and 

technical results, leading to new and innovative technologies. In July 2018, AI Singapore, the 

French Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation (INRIA), the French National 

Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), and the French Institute of Health and Medical Research 

(INSERM) signed a Memorandum of Understanding on research collaboration in five focus areas: 

AI in Healthcare, Explainable AI, Federated and Distributed Learning, Natural Language Processing 

and Privacy, Trust & Accountability in AI and Data Sharing.

The MOU on AI cooperation was signed in July 2018 in the presence of Singapore’s 

Minister for Trade and Industry Mr Chan Chun Sing, France’s Minister for Higher 

Education, Research and Innovation Frédérique Vidal, Deputy Chief of Mission, 

Embassy of Singapore in Paris Karen Ong, CEO of Inserm Yves Levy, CEO of INRIA 

Bruno Sportisse and CEO of CNRS Antoine Petit. 

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy74 

75 

5

WORKING
TOGETHER 

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy76 

77 

ORGANISING OURSELVES FOR 
SUSTAINABLE SUCCESS

We have established a National AI Office under the Smart Nation and Digital Government Office.

The National AI Office will set the national agenda for AI and catalyse efforts across research, industry, 

and Government stakeholders to work on national AI priorities. 

The National AI Strategy requires a whole-of-nation effort, with Singaporeans, businesses, researchers 

and the Government working closely together. Singapore will also need to work with international 

partners to advance the deployment of AI in Singapore. 

1.  National AI Projects. We have announced a first tranche of five National AI Projects centred on key 

challenges. We invite researchers, companies, and individuals to propose solutions, or to suggest 

  new National AI Projects.  

2.  Transform your business with AI. No matter the size of your company, you can begin your AI

 transformation journey today by building up your technological capabilities and digital 

infrastructure. There are many avenues where companies can receive support from the Government. 

If you are a company that is already adopting AI, take part in data sharing initiatives to promote 

greater use of AI, and contribute to a trusted environment by adopting AI governance initiatives. 

3.  Participate in Singapore’s AI ecosystem. As we transform our key sectors through AI, there will

  be an abundance of opportunities for businesses to research, develop and deploy AI solutions

in Singapore for the region. Both local and international investors can consider establishing an

  AI team in Singapore, and leveraging Singapore’s research ecosystem to enhance and validate

  new AI methodologies. 

4.  Learn about AI. Given that AI can be applied to any field, it will be important for workers to 

  understand how AI can be applied in their respective domains. Find out about the opportunities

for you to learn the skills necessary to participate in the AI economy. 

For more information on how to be involved in the National AI Strategy, visit go.gov.sg/AIStrategy

Conclusion

We will develop and implement the National AI Strategy iteratively, to respond to the rapidly changing 

technology landscape and to seize new opportunities. The 5 National AI Projects and 5 ecosystem 

enablers are but a first step in our multi-year AI journey. We will continue to embark on more National 

AI Projects and adjust the enablers as we learn through implementation. This is a whole-of-nation 

effort, and we welcome ideas and action from individuals and companies to help deliver our AI vision 

for Singapore. Let us work together to build a Smart Nation, to improve lives and make Singapore an 

outstanding place to live, work and play.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 

79 

6

WHAT THE
EXPERTS SAY

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy80 

81 

WHAT THE EXPERTS SAY

Mr Andreas Ebert

Worldwide National Technology Officer, Microsoft Corporation

With computers capable of understanding humans for the first time, the world is at an inflection

point − with implications extending beyond technology into economy and national development. 

Already a global thought leader on AI ethics and governance, the publication of the National

AI Strategy is evidence that Singapore is taking a holistic and inclusive approach on how the nation 

can be a fast adopter of best-in-class technology that is empowered by a focus on building national 

capabilities. When you underpin all of these with trust, through Singapore’s Trusted Data Sharing 

Framework and international digital economy agreements, this geographically little island nation is 

excellently positioned to play a leading role in facilitating cross border data flows that will realize

AI applications and services to improve people’s lives and local businesses. Microsoft is committed 

to the success of Singapore’s AI and data journey, and we look forward to contributing to the 

implementation of the Strategy.

Dr Andrew Ng

CEO and Founder, Landing AI

The world has caught on to the power of artificial intelligence, but we have still barely scratched

the surface. To move the world forward, we will need millions more AI engineers. We also need to 

educate our leaders across government, businesses and academia so they can build AI solutions

that bring positive change to their communities.

Having grown up in Singapore, I’ve seen firsthand its excellent educational system, which gives 

students a strong foundation in math and science, as well as its international connections and ability 

to attract ideas and talent from around the world. Singapore already has a strong foundation on top 

of which to build AI. The National Artificial Intelligence Strategy outlines several important, actionable 

steps that build on these strengths. These include:

•  Thoughtful regulations. Singapore has an opportunity to enact thoughtful regulations that

  allow for innovation and experimentation while protecting citizens’ safety. Sound regulations 

  empower Singaporean AI engineers to work on cutting-edge problems that can immediately

  benefit their community.

•  Human-centric approach. Singapore is simultaneously training talent to work on major technological 

  developments and investing resources in retraining and education programs. Building social 

  programs and technology in parallel, Singapore can prepare its citizens for changes and transitions 

in an AI-powered future. 

•  Sectoral transformation. Singapore’s AI Strategy focuses on several use cases that can immediately 

  benefit the nation. These use cases − spanning healthcare, manufacturing, logistics, security, 

  education and more − will merge Singapore’s engineering talent together with real companies

in order to develop more impactful real-world solutions.

Silicon Valley and Beijing have been global leaders in AI research and developing AI-first startups. 

But Singapore’s vision lies in becoming a leader in developing and deploying scalable, impactful 

AI solutions in key sectors by 2030. I commend Singapore for leading the way in globalizing and 

democratizing the next wave of artificial intelligence. 

Singapore has all the pieces needed to become a regional AI hub. To everyone working on

building this vision, I say: Majulah Singapura! 

Professor Ho Teck Hua

Executive Chairman, AI Singapore

Senior Deputy President and Provost, and Tan Chin Tuan Centennial Professor, 

National University of Singapore

The Singapore government has always been deliberate in envisioning, planning, and executing

its Smart Nation initiatives.

The National Artificial Intelligence Strategy (NAIS) maps out a bold and concrete plan to develop and 

deploy digital and AI technologies across economic sectors. The NAIS identifies powerful use cases that 

have the potential to transform industry and improve the lives of people in Singapore. AI has the power 

to amplify human potential and multiply our productivity. It will create many new and exciting jobs

and power the growth of our digital economy.

AI Singapore is excited to be a key implementer of the NAIS. We will champion deep research and 

technology translation, accelerate AI adoption by industry, and develop a strong pipeline of AI talent. 

We will help to build a strong and vibrant AI Ecosystem, to attract global AI talent and companies,

and to make Singapore a leading hub for AI.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82 

83 

Professor Isaac Ben Israel

Chairman, Israel Space Agency

Director, Blavatnik Cyber Research Centre, Tel-Aviv University

Co-chair, Israel National Task Force for AI

Element AI is strongly committed to partnering with Singapore in its mandate to develop a nation 

driven by innovation between government, academia and industry. Our role as a member of this 

ecosystem is to bring world-class research and technology to ensure the NAIS delivers sustainable 

growth and positive impact from AI, both at a national level and across the region.

The dominant technology of our century is computer technology, and its latest application is AI. 

AI is impacting nearly every facet of our lives, with machine learning becoming more capable

and improving efficiencies in daily life. Thus, understanding and developing AI is key for the

future of our world.

Singapore has all the ingredients to be, within a decade or so, a world leader in this

emerging technology.  

Actually, Singapore has some relative advantages that promise an excellent start: educated people

and highly developed education system, knowledge based economy and effective government.

With the right strategy, AI can transform national-level planning and significantly raise the quality 

of public goods like transport, education and healthcare, raise productivity, and enable the creation 

of valuable products and solutions for the Singapore market and beyond, and overall improving 

significantly the lives of Singaporeans. 

Altogether, Singapore took today a huge step ahead, leading the way to a more efficient future.

Mr Jean Francois Gagné

Co-Founder and CEO, Element AI

The pace of change in the field of AI is dramatic and being an inspiring leader is the only way to

unlock transformative value for society. Singapore is becoming a leader in AI, with its increased

focus and investments across its burgeoning AI ecosystem which is supported by its sound

governance and regulatory frameworks.

The National AI Strategy (NAIS) is an ideal starting point from which the public and private sectors

can rally behind key national initiatives and ensure that AI initiatives improve the lives of 

Singaporeans. Element AI is a strong advocate of using human-centric principles that are ethical, 

transparent and trustworthy for the design, deployment and adoption of AI.     

Mr Jeff Zhang

Chief Technology Officer, Alibaba Group

President, Alibaba Cloud Intelligence

The launch of the National AI Strategy further affirms our decision to work closely with Singapore 

to build its digital economy. Singapore has consistently demonstrated its foresight and tenacity to 

fulfil the nation’s objectives, as demonstrated in its strong talent base and world-leading research 

institutions. This is what first drew us to set up Alibaba Cloud’s international headquarters and Alibaba 

Cloud’s first overseas research institute in Singapore. We have subsequently embarked on partnerships 

with A*STAR, the National University of Singapore and the Nanyang Technological University to expand 

AI ecosystems across advanced manufacturing, fintech, retail, tourism and smart city management 

under the Smart Nation initiative. With the launch of the National AI Strategy, Singapore is well placed 

to harness the transformative potential of AI and data intelligence to empower industry across sectors.

Dr Richard Socher

Chief Scientist, Salesforce

Singapore is a regional and global leader when it comes to AI. Singapore’s National AI Strategy (NAIS) 

will help propel Singapore to continue to harness AI effectively and develop these skills

and capabilities locally. 

This is evidenced in Salesforce’s Research Asia hub in Singapore, our first outside the United State

to develop AI talent and the AI ecosystem. A deliberate decision, based on Singapore’s AI focus

and capability. 

I congratulate the Government of Singapore on the NAIS, a forward-looking vision to steer

Singapore to the forefront of AI.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84 

85 

Professor Tang Xiao’ou

Founder, SenseTime

Professor, Chinese University of Hong Kong

Dr Yan Shuicheng

Chief Technology Officer, Yitu Tech

The National AI Strategy (NAIS) is the turnkey to drive whole-of-nation AI innovation and adoption,

AI research. Their accomplishments have been recognised by the international AI research community, 

and to build long-term industry trust through responsible AI governance in Singapore. It is an 

with frequent awards in flagship AI competitions and many high-impact AI publications. Now, it is

ambitious plan that will position Singapore as a leading AI hub in the region.

time for us to take a step forward and consider how to transform these AI research capabilities into 

actual impact and value for our society and economy. To realise such a transformation, building an

The NAIS will further empower SenseTime, an AI technology platform company, to establish

AI ecosystem is very crucial, as is identifying the proper business scenarios that would benefit from AI. 

our Singapore base as a living lab to test and scale innovative AI solutions for the global stage,

The 5 national AI projects and 5 ecosystem enablers proposed in the National AI Strategy (NAIS) will 

and to facilitate international collaboration. 

generate great momentum for the transformation process.

In the past decade, Singapore’s AI researchers have made fruitful contributions to fundamental

We are confident in further contributing to Singapore’s AI ecosystem and the empowerment of 

Beyond nurturing AI talents, how to attract and anchor these AI talents is an even bigger challenge. 

Singapore’s various strategic industries. The NAIS’ concrete talent development plan, in particular, 

It is believed that the best way to do so is to incubate more fast-growing local startups. When more 

aligns with our commitment to harness the local talent pool to strengthen our core capabilities

Singapore-based startups are internationally recognised, even more AI talents would be willing to join 

in Singapore and beyond.

V.K. Rajah, SC

them and relocate to work in Singapore, thus gradually forming a strong and healthy talent community. 

The NAIS provides great opportunities for incubating fast-growing local startups through offering help 

in building the different key AI ecosystem enablers, including talents, data, business scenarios,

Chairman, Advisory Council on the Ethical Use of AI and Data

and global collaborations. I am excited by the opportunities ahead and am confident that Singapore 

will be a leading player in AI.

The launch of the National AI Strategy is timely. In the near future, AI is likely to pervasively affect 

and influence all aspects of our lives in many ways. As a society, we must be alive to its benefits and 

potential pitfalls. Trust is crucial to the adoption of AI, and building trust is a multi-stakeholder

effort involving public, private and people sectors.

Singapore has shown thought leadership in developing a human-centric approach to AI governance 

that balances the need for innovation and consumer protection. Our voluntary Model AI Governance 

Framework was the first national framework in Asia that provides practical guidance to organisations

on how to implement AI responsibly. This is just the start of a never ending journey. We need to 

continue to identify and address the ethical concerns that AI brings. The Advisory Council on the

Ethical Use of AI and Data fully supports this national effort to create an enabling environment

for our businesses and citizens.

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyNational Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 

BROUGHT TO YOU BY

PARTNERING AGENCIES

National Artificial Intelligence StrategyPublished November 2019

Copyright © 2019 by Smart Nation Digital Government Office. Not to

be reproduced unless with explicit consent from Smart Nation Digital

Government Office. First released in November 2019.

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,

stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 

electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the

prior written permission of the copyright owner.

 
